The Trump administration is making a push to facilitate exports of unmanned aerial systems, but how much of an impact it will have depends on a variety of factors, analysts said.
One of the most significant changes in modern warfare has been the proliferation of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, more widely known as drones. As recently as two decades ago, only a small number of countries — most prominently, the United States, United Kingdom and Israel — possessed military-grade drones that were capable of even limited military operations. Today, most countries with capable militaries have at least a token capacity to build and fly surveillance drones, and the drive to deploy armed drones is accelerating. According to a RAND study published in 2014, twenty-three countries were developing their own armed drones.
Drones should be treated as a distinct class of weapons. They have unique properties that lead them to be used, and defended against, in ways that are destabilizing. In November 2013, Canada’s chief of defense staff, General Thomas Lawson, made a claim that is commonplace among military officials: “If a kinetic round is propelled toward a confirmed enemy for strategic purposes by a rifle, by an artillery piece, by an aircraft manned, or by an aircraft unmanned, any of those that end up with a desired effect is a supportable point of view.”15 Similarly, in May 2012, then chief of staff of the U.S. Air Force, General Norton Schwartz declared, “If it is a legitimate target, then I would argue that the manner in which you engage that target, whether it be close combat or remotely, is not a terribly relevant question.”16 This premise is technically true and consistent with military officials’ efforts to demystify drones, reduce public opposition to them, and integrate them into their armed services. However, these assumptions overlook the unique advantages of armed drones, which raise the prospect for moral hazard, where governments are more willing to use them over other weapons platforms because the associated costs and risks are assumed to be comparably lower. Indeed, the Obama administration commissioned a separate review of U.S. drone export policies, precisely because the vast majority of U.S. officials believe that it is a distinct weapons system.17
Another reason to be concerned about the growing drone arms race is the danger of accidents and the conflict spirals that can come from them. While drones are becoming more sophisticated, they are still prone to frequent accidents. According to an estimate in 2010, the United States has experienced at least 79 drone accidents costing at least $1 million each, as well 38 Predator and Reaper drone crashes during combat missions in Afghanistan and Iraq.76 Drones such as the Pioneer and Shadow drones have even higher rates of accidents.77 A later estimate in 2014 put the total number of major drone crashes at over 400 since 2001.78 Although it is estimated that many of these accidents are caused by human error, and that accident rate is declining, these rates are still much higher than comparable manned aircraft.79 It is also probable that less sophisticated and robust models sold by China and other new suppliers will have a higher rate of accident than the more robust American models. Simply as a matter of probability, it is likely that drone accidents will become more commonplace as more drones take to the skies in the future.
Soon after the sharp criticism of Beijing’s South China Sea policy at the Shangri-La Dialogue held in Singapore at the end of May, the US announced that it would sell military surveillance drones to four Southeast Asian countries, including Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam, and the Philippines. The drones, as military experts explained, would be used in intelligence gathering and monitoring activities of Chinese warships in the South China Sea (SCS). It is the latest measure the US has adopted to boost its allies and partners’ intelligence-gathering and reconnaissance capabilities amid the tension with China in the ECS. China must face the resulting dilemma. For one thing, China has to do something to respond to the possible incursion of foreign military surveillance drones once they enter into Chinese territorial waters and occupied islands in the ECS, such as tracking, expelling, or even capturing these drones in extreme circumstances. For another, such actions might create new tensions between China and the claimants to SCS territories and waters, thus giving the US an excuse for increasing its military presence as well as interference in the SCS. Given this new development, Southeast Asian states need to be aware of the serious consequences of using these military drones on Chinese assets in disputed waters and be careful about making military procurement deals with the US. In fact, depending on American military hardware is not the right way for the Southeast Asian states to deal with China. Rather, those countries might get caught up in the great power rivalry between Washington and Beijing. Since China has pushed forward Code of Conduct (COC) negotiations and developed maritime cooperation with the Philippines and Vietnam—two important stakeholders in the SCS territorial disputes—ASEAN states should continue to work together with China to maintain the peace and stability of the SCS. The US has attempted to hinder China’s desire for growing military influence in the region by militarizing the Southeast Asian states—a difficult task that has not met with much success. Not only that, the fragile balance of forces in the region, as well as the peace and stability in the ECS, would be threatened by America’s growing arms exports to the region. The military rivalry between the US and China would also be intensified by a renewed arms race. In this context, Washington should be fully aware of Beijing’s rising concerns about US arms sales to Southeast Asian countries. Apart from the recent American arms deals with Southeast Asian nations, new actions have been taken by the US to deter China in the SCS. Following the joint drill between the US, Japan, the Philippines, and India in the SCS last month, the US Coast Guard Cutter Bertholf and two vessels from the Philippine Coast Guard conducted the first joint search and rescue exercise near the Huangyan islands that China has claimed in Scarborough Shoal. At that point, US Vice Admiral Linda Fagan, commander of the Coast Guard’s Pacific Area, announced that the US Navy had sent the Coast Guard vessels to monitor China’s military activities in the SCS. The significance of the US Coast Guard’s emergence into the SCS is that the US has started to maximize the overall level of its deterrence capability in the region. As Linda Fagan said, “The US Coast Guard is proud to operate with our Pacific counterparts, and together we are dedicated to enhancing our capabilities and strengthening maritime governance and security while promoting individual sovereignty...This type of engagement gives us a great opportunity to share our experiences and learn from our partners in the Philippine Coast Guard.”Since the US overtly claimed that Chinese militias are a kind of government force, it is likely that the US Coast Guard might escalate tensions when encountering Chinese militia groups. To conclude, the America’s greater involvement in the ECS issue will cause more confrontations between Washington and Beijing, thus creating a deteriorating security situation in the region. Given this risk, the US should exercise restraint and avoid provoking China by taking aggressive actions in the ECS. China should enhance the transparency of its military deployment on SCS islands and strengthen military exchanges with both the US and the Southeast Asian countries so as to relieve their concerns about the “China threat.” China should also develop a contingency plan for properly handling potential emergencies in the SCS. At this juncture, it is necessary for China and the US to discuss the possible serious consequences of the use of military drones as well as the presence of the US Coast Guard in the SCS, and establish crisis-management mechanisms so as to prevent conflicts from happening.
The Trump administration has approved the sale of armed drones to India and has offered integrated air and missile defence systems aimed at helping the country boost its military capabilities and protect shared security interests in the strategically important Indo-Pacific region.
PAKISTAN has declared that it is “worried” about India’s “predator drone technology” as tensions rise between the two South Asian along with the contested border known as the Line of Control (LoC), it has emerged.
Pakistan’s Prime Minister Imran Khan called for talks with India and warned of miscalculations that could lead to nuclear war in a national television address on Wednesday, hours after his nation’s air force claimed to have shot down two Indian warplanes and captured a pilot.
A “pink flamingo” is a term recently coined by Frank Hoffman to describe predictable but ignored events that can yield disastrous results. Hoffman argues that these situations are fully visible, but almost entirely ignored by policymakers. Pink flamingos stand in stark contrast to “black swans“—the unpredictable, even unforeseeable shocks whose outcomes may be entirely unknown. The tense nuclear stand-off between India and Pakistan may be the most dangerous pink flamingo in today’s world. The Indian subcontinent—home to both India and Pakistan—remains among the most dangerous corners of the world, and continues to pose a deep threat to global stability and the current world order. Their 1,800-mile border is the only place in the world where two hostile, nuclear-armed states face off every day. And the risk of nuclear conflict has only continued to rise in the past few years, to the point that it is now a very real possibility. India and Pakistan have fought three wars since they gained independence in 1947, including one that ended in 1971 with Pakistan losing approximately half its territory (present-day Bangladesh). Today, the disputed Line of Control that divides the disputed Kashmir region remains a particularly tense flash point. Both the Kargil crisis of 1999 and the 2001 attack on the Indian Parliament by Pakistan-supported militants brought both nations once again to the brink of war. Yet, unlike earlier major wars, these two crises occurred after both India and Pakistan became nuclear-armed states. Quick and forceful diplomatic intervention played a pivotal role in preventing a larger conflict from erupting during each crisis. These stakes are even higher, and more dangerous, today. Since 2004, India has been developing a new military doctrine called Cold Start, a limited war option designed largely to deter Islamabad from sponsoring irregular attacks against New Delhi. It involves rapid conventional retaliation after any such attack, launching a number of quick armoured assaults into Pakistan and rapidly securing limited objectives that hypothetically remain below Pakistan’s nuclear threshold. In accordance with this doctrine, the Indian military is meant to mobilise half a million troops in less than 72 hours. The problem is, unlike its neighbours India and China, Pakistan has not renounced the first use of nuclear weapons. Instead, Pakistani leaders have stated that they may have to use nuclear weapons first in order to defend against a conventional attack from India. Therefore, both to counter Cold Start and help to offset India’s growing conventional superiority, Pakistan has accelerated its nuclear weapons programme—and begun to field short-range, low yield tactical nuclear weapons. Some observers now judge this nuclear programme to be the fastest growing in the world. Pakistan will reportedly have enough fissile material by 2020 to build more than 200 nuclear warheads—more than the UK plans to have by that time. It is not simply the pace of the build-up that should cause concern. Pakistan’s arsenal of short-range tactical nuclear weapons is a game changer in other ways. Pakistan clearly intends to use these weapons—on its own soil if necessary—to counter Cold Start’s plan for sudden Indian armoured thrusts into Pakistan. The introduction of these weapons has altered the long-standing geometry between the two nuclear powers and increases the risk of escalation to a nuclear exchange in a crisis. Beyond the risks of runaway nuclear escalation, Pakistan’s growing tactical nuclear weapons programme also brings a wide array of other destabilising characteristics to this already unstable mix: the necessity to position these short-range weapons close to the border with India, making them more vulnerable to interdiction; the need to move and disperse these weapons during a crisis, thereby signalling a nuclear threat; and the prospects of local commanders being given decentralised control of the weapons—a “use it or lose it” danger if facing an Indian armoured offensive. Furthermore, large numbers of small nuclear weapons scattered at different locations increase the risk that some will fall into the hands of violent extremists. A terrorist group gaining control of a nuclear weapon remains one of the most frightening potential spin-offs of the current arms race. Perhaps the most dangerous scenario that could lead to catastrophe is a replay of the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks. In November 2008, 10 terrorists launched attacks that left 166 people dead before the last of attackers were finally killed by Indian security forces almost 60 hours after the attacks began. By that time, there was strong evidence that the attackers were Pakistani and belonged to a Pakistan-supported militant group. Indian public outrage and humiliation were overwhelming. Only through the combination of diplomatic pressure from the US and immense restraint exerted by then-Indian prime minister Manmohan Singh was an Indian retaliatory strike averted. The chances of such Indian government restraint in a similarly deadly future scenario are unlikely. Experts such as Stephen Cohen of the Brookings Institution and former US ambassador to India Robert Blackwill agree that if there were another Mumbai, Indian prime minister Narendra Modi would not step back from using military force in response, unlike his predecessors. Indian public opinion would demand retaliation, especially after the unpopular degree of restraint exercised by the Singh government after the Mumbai attacks. But there remains no meaningful senior-level dialogue between the two states—last August’s planned meeting between the two national security advisers was cancelled after disagreements about Kashmiri separatists. There may be little the US or the world can do to forestall this conflict still looming just over the horizon. Nevertheless, the tremendous dangers of this situation require US policymakers to devote more time and energy in trying to do so, and some small steps may help. The US should work hard to catalyse confidence-building measures between the two sides, seeking to open more peacetime channels to create dialogue and potential conflict mediation options for the future. Neither nation’s military currently has any direct communications. Quiet, off-the-record meetings between senior military leaders would help lessen tensions and establish some degree of mutual dialogue and understanding before a crisis erupts. The US should also sponsor unofficial tabletop exercises involving representatives of each side to explore how escalation in a nuclear conflict could unfold. The US should also reach out to current (and former) civil and military decision-makers on both sides to develop and grow bilateral relationships that could prove vital in the next crisis. And the US should continue to encourage Pakistan to slow its fielding of tactical nuclear weapons, and keep them under tight central control well away from vulnerable forward-deployed positions. The lack of any tangible results from the US government’s recent outreach to Pakistan on this topic should only encourage renewed efforts. A nuclear war between India and Pakistan would dramatically alter the world as we know it. The damage from fallout and blast, the deaths of potentially millions, and the environmental devastation of even a few weapons detonations would suddenly dwarf any other global problem. There is no shortage of conflicts and crises around the world demanding the attention of policymakers in Washington and other capitals. But the stakes of a war between two of the world’s most hostile nuclear powers deserves attention before the next inevitable flare-up. Taking a series of modest steps now to try to avert the worst outcomes from this dangerous pink flamingo hiding in plain sight is an investment well worth making.
If one of the main reasons why states do not use drones in some settings is their vulnerability to air defenses, then intrastate conflicts (i.e., those in which insurgents, domestic protest groups, or suspected terrorists are less likely to have sophisticated air defense systems) are best-suited to the use of drones. Indeed, for some of the same reasons that states find drones attractive in an interstate setting—primarily that they seem to come at low risk and low cost—they might be inclined to use them against perceived domestic enemies. Many of the countries that have or are pursuing armed drones, such as China, Iraq, Pakistan, Russia, and Turkey, have opposition movements that potentially threaten their leaders’ hold on power. Unmanned drones might be attractive to these leaders, who may prefer to target insurgents or suspected terrorist networks with drones rather than ground forces or manned aircraft. With their precision and long loiter time, drones might be seen as able to perform tasks that otherwise could expose regime forces to unacceptable risk.116
The exponential rise in the use of drone technology in a variety of military and non-military contexts represents a real challenge to the framework of established international law and it is both right as a matter of principle, and inevitable as a matter of political reality, that the international community should now be focusing attention on the standards applicable to this technological development, particularly its deployment in counterterrorism and counter-insurgency initiatives, and attempt to reach a consensus on the legality of its use, and the standards and safeguards which should apply to it.4 deliver deadly force is taking place in both public and official domains in the United States and many other countries.5 The four key features at the heart of the debate revolve around: who is controlling the weapon system; does the system of control and oversight violate international law governing the use of force; are the drone strikes proportionate acts that provide military effectiveness given the circumstances of the conflict they are being used in; and does their use violate the sovereignty of other nations and allow the United States to disregard formal national boundaries? Unless these four questions are dealt with in the near future the impact of the unresolved legitimacy issues will have a number of repercussions for American foreign and military policies: “Without a new doctrine for the use of drones that is understandable to friends and foes, the United States risks achieving near-term tactical benefits in killing terrorists while incurring potentially significant longer-term costs to its alliances, global public opinion, the war on terrorism and international stability.”6 This article will address only the first three critical questions. The question of who controls the drones during their missions is attracting a great deal of attention. The use of drones by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to conduct “signature strikes” is the most problematic factor in this matter. Between 2004 and 2013, CIA drone attacks in Pakistan killed up to 3,461—up to 891 of them civilians.7 Not only is the use of drones by the CIA the issue, but subcontracting operational control of drones to other civilian agencies is also causing great concern.8 Questions remain as to whether subcontractors were controlling drones during actual strike missions, as opposed to surveillance and reconnaissance activities. Nevertheless, the intense questioning of John O. Brennan, President Obama’s nominee for director of the CIA in February 2013, over drone usage, the secrecy of their controllers and orders, and the legality of their missions confirmed the level of concern America’s elected officials have regarding the legitimacy of drone use. Furthermore, perceptions and suspicions of illegal clandestine intelligence agency operations, already a part of the public and official psyche due to experiences from Vietnam, Iran-Contra, and Iraq II and the weapons of mass destruction debacle, have been reinforced by CIA management of drone capability. Recent revelations about the use of secret Saudi Arabian facilities for staging American drone strikes into Yemen did nothing to dissipate such suspicions of the CIA’s lack of legitimacy in its use of drones.9 The fact that the secret facility was the launching site for drones used to kill American citizens Anwar al-Awlaki and his son in September 2011, both classified by the CIA as al-Qaeda-linked threats to US security, only deepened such suspicions. Despite the fact that Gulf State observers and officials knew about American drones operating from the Arabian peninsula for years, the existence of the CIA base was not openly admitted in case such knowledge should “ . . . damage counter-terrorism collaboration with Saudi Arabia.”10 The fallout from CIA involvement and management of drone strikes prompted Senator Dianne Feinstein, Chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, to suggest the need for a court to oversee targeted killings. Such a body, she said, would replicate the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which oversees eavesdropping on American soil.11 Most importantly, such oversight would go a long way towards allaying fears of the drone usage lacking true political accountability and legitimacy. In addition, as with any use of force, drone strikes in overseas contingency operations can lead to increased attacks on already weak governments partnered with the United States. They can lead to retaliatory attacks on local governments and may contribute to local instability. Those actions occur as a result of desires for revenge and frustrations caused by the strikes. Feelings of hostility are often visited on the most immediate structures of authority—local government officials, government buildings, police, and the military.12 It can thus be argued that, at the strategic level, drone strikes are fuelling anti-American resentment among enemies and allies alike. Those reactions are often based on questions regarding the legality, ethicality, and operational legitimacy of those acts to deter opponents. Therefore, specifically related to the reaction of allies, the military legitimacy question arises if the use of drones endangers vital strategic relationships.13 One of the strategic relationships being affected by the drone legitimacy issue is that of the United States and the United Kingdom. Targeted killing, by drone strike or otherwise, is not the sole preserve of the United States. Those actions, however, attract more negative attention to the United States due to its prominence on the world’s stage, its declarations of support for human rights and democratic freedoms, and rule-of-law issues, all which appear violated by such strikes. This complexity and visibility make such targeted killings important for Anglo-American strategic relations because of the closeness of that relationship and the perception that Great Britain, therefore, condones such American activities. Because the intelligence used in such operations is seen by other nations as a shared Anglo-American asset, the use of such intelligence to identify and conduct such killings, in the opinion those operations.14 Finally, the apparent gap between stated core policies and values and the ability to practice targeted killings appears to be a starkly hypocritical and deceitful position internationally, a condition that once again makes British policymakers uncomfortable with being tarred by such a brush.15 The divide between US policy and action is exacerbated by drone technology, which makes the once covert practice of targeted killing commonplace and undeniable. It may also cause deep-rooted distrust due to a spectrum of legitimacy issues. Such questions will, therefore, undermine the US desire to export liberal democratic principles. Indeed, it may be beneficial for Western democracies to achieve adequate rather than decisive victories, thereby setting an example of restraint for the international order.16 The United States must be willing to engage and deal with drone-legitimacy issues across the entire spectrum of tactical, operational, strategic, and political levels to ensure its strategic aims are not derailed by operational and tactical expediency.
The emergence of peer competitors, not terrorism, presents the greatest long-term threat to our national security. Over the past decade, while the United States concentrated its geopolitical focus on fighting two land wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, China has quietly begun implementing a strategy to emerge as the dominant imperial power within Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean. Within the next 2 decades, China will likely replace the United States as the Asia-Pacific regional hegemonic power, if not replace us as the global superpower.1 Although China presents its rise as peaceful and non-hegemonic, its construction of naval bases in neighboring countries and military expansion in the region contradict that argument. With a credible threat to its leading position in a unipolar global order, the United States should adopt a grand strategy of “investment,” building legitimacy and capacity in the very institutions that will protect our interests in a liberal global construct of the future when we are no longer the dominant imperial power. Similar to the Clinton era's grand strategy of “enlargement,”2 investment supports a world order predicated upon a system of basic rules and principles, however, it differs in that the United States should concentrate on the institutions (i.e., United Nations, World Trade Organization, ASEAN, alliances, etc.) that support a world order, as opposed to expanding democracy as a system of governance for other sovereign nations. Despite its claims of a benevolent expansion, China is already executing a strategy of expansion similar to that of Imperial Japan's Manchukuo policy during the 1930s.3 This three-part strategy involves: “(i) (providing) significant investments in economic infrastructure for extracting natural resources; (ii) (conducting) military interventions (to) protect economic interests; and, (iii) . . . (annexing) via installation of puppet governments.”4 China has already solidified its control over neighboring North Korea and Burma, and has similarly begun more ambitious engagements in Africa and Central Asia where it seeks to expand its frontier.5 Noted political scientist Samuel P. Huntington provides further analysis of the motives behind China's imperial aspirations. He contends that “China (has) historically conceived itself as encompassing a “‘Sinic Zone'. . . (with) two goals: to become the champion of Chinese culture . . . and to resume its historical position, which it lost in the nineteenth century, as the hegemonic power in East Asia.”6 Furthermore, China holds one quarter of the world's population, and rapid economic growth will increase its demand for natural resources from outside its borders as its people seek a standard of living comparable to that of Western civilization. The rise of peer competitors has historically resulted in regional instability and one should compare “the emergence of China to the rise of. . . Germany as the dominant power in Europe in the late nineteenth century.”7 Furthermore, the rise of another peer competitor on the level of the Soviet Union of the Cold War ultimately threatens U.S. global influence, challenging its concepts of human rights, liberalism, and democracy; as well as its ability to co-opt other nations to accept them.8 This decline in influence, while initially limited to the Asia-Pacific region, threatens to result in significant conflict if it ultimately leads to a paradigm shift in the ideas and principles that govern the existing world order. A grand strategy of investment to address the threat of China requires investing in institutions, addressing ungoverned states, and building legitimacy through multilateralism. The United States must build capacity in the existing institutions and alliances accepted globally as legitimate representative bodies of the world's governments. For true legitimacy, the United States must support these institutions, not only when convenient, in order to avoid the appearance of unilateralism, which would ultimately undermine the very organizations upon whom it will rely when it is no longer the global hegemon. The United States must also address ungoverned states, not only as breeding grounds for terrorism, but as conflicts that threaten to spread into regional instability, thereby drawing in superpowers with competing interests. Huntington proposes that the greatest source of conflict will come from what he defines as one “core” nation's involvement in a conflict between another core nation and a minor state within its immediate sphere of influence.9 For example, regional instability in South Asia10 threatens to involve combatants from the United States, India, China, and the surrounding nations. Appropriately, the United States, as a global power, must apply all elements of its national power now to address the problem of weak and failing states, which threaten to serve as the principal catalysts of future global conflicts.11 Admittedly, the application of American power in the internal affairs of a sovereign nation raises issues. Experts have posed the question of whether the United States should act as the world's enforcer of stability, imposing its concepts of human rights on other states. In response to this concern, The International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty authored a study titled, The Responsibility to Protect,12 calling for revisions to the understanding of sovereignty within the United Nations (UN) charter. This commission places the responsibility to protect peoples of sovereign nations on both the state itself and, more importantly, on the international community.13 If approved, this revision will establish a precedent whereby the United States has not only the authority and responsibility to act within the internal affairs of a repressive government, but does so with global legitimacy if done under the auspices of a UN mandate. Any effort to legitimize and support a liberal world construct requires the United States to adopt a multilateral doctrine which avoids the precepts of the previous administration: “preemptive war, democratization, and U.S. primacy of unilateralism,”14 which have resulted in the alienation of former allies worldwide. Predominantly Muslim nations, whose citizens had previously looked to the United States as an example of representative governance, viewed the Iraq invasion as the seminal dividing action between the Western and the Islamic world. Appropriately, any future American interventions into the internal affairs of another sovereign nation must first seek to establish consensus by gaining the approval of a body representing global opinion, and must reject military unilateralism as a threat to that governing body's legitimacy. Despite the long-standing U.S. tradition of a liberal foreign policy since the start of the Cold War, the famous liberal leviathan, John Ikenberry, argues that “the post-9/11 doctrine of national security strategy . . . has been based on . . . American global dominance, the preventative use of force, coalitions of the willing, and the struggle between liberty and evil.”15 American foreign policy has misguidedly focused on spreading democracy, as opposed to building a liberal international order based on universally accepted principles that actually set the conditions for individual nation states to select their own system of governance. Anne-Marie Slaughter, the former Dean of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, argues that true Wilsonian idealists “support liberal democracy, but reject the possibility of democratizing peoples . . .”16 and reject military primacy in favor of supporting a rules-based system of order. Investment in a liberal world order would also set the conditions for the United States to garner support from noncommitted regional powers (i.e., Russia, India, Japan, etc.), or “swing civilizations,” in countering China's increasing hegemonic influence.17 These states reside within close proximity to the Indian Ocean, which will likely emerge as the geopolitical focus of the American foreign policy during the 21st century, and appropriately have the ability to offset China's imperial dominance in the region.18 Critics of a liberal world construct argue that idealism is not necessary, based on the assumption that nations that trade together will not go to war with each other.19 In response, foreign affairs columnist Thomas L. Friedman rebukes their arguments, acknowledging the predicate of commercial interdependence as a factor only in the decision to go to war, and argues that while globalization is creating a new international order, differences between civilizations still create friction that may overcome all other factors and lead to conflict.20 Detractors also warn that as China grows in power, it will no longer observe “the basic rules and principles of a liberal international order,” which largely result from Western concepts of foreign relations. Ikenberry addresses this risk, citing that China's leaders already recognize that they will gain more authority within the existing liberal order, as opposed to contesting it. China's leaders “want the protection and rights that come from the international order's . . . defense of sovereignty,”21 from which they have benefitted during their recent history of economic growth and international expansion. Even if China executes a peaceful rise and the United States overestimates a Sinic threat to its national security interest, the emergence of a new imperial power will challenge American leadership in the Indian Ocean and Asia-Pacific region. That being said, it is more likely that China, as evidenced by its military and economic expansion, will displace the United States as the regional hegemonic power. Recognizing this threat now, the United States must prepare for the eventual transition and immediately begin building the legitimacy and support of a system of rules that will protect its interests later when we are no longer the world's only superpower.
The United States is the world’s most prolific user of armed drones; indeed, Israel and the United Kingdom are the only other countries known to have utilized such weapons in combat. Yet it would be unwise for Washington to ignore the risk of armed drone proliferation. Though surveillance drones are in wide use around the world, countries seeking armed drones are often in areas of tenuous security, where a new weapons system can be inherently destabilizing. China and Iran are already thought to have functioning armed drones. India, Pakistan, Turkey, and others have expressed an interest in acquiring them. Even Hezbollah, the Iranian-supported terrorist group, attempted to use them during its 2006 war with Israel. And all of this activity is taking place in the absence of commonly adhered-to regulations and norms on the sale and use of these weapons.
One point of agreement between the various regulatory proposals is that the United States needs to take a leading role in implementation. They contend that it must act quickly while it is in a position of strength— because it will soon lose its monopoly over drones and the leverage that goes along with that special status. In other words, they argue that it is in the United States’ long-term interest to introduce some regulatory framework for drones and that failure to do this in the near future could reduce the chances of ever developing effective regulations. The question now is whether the United States would actually support regulating drone strikes at this time. Our experiments did not inquire into respondents’ feelings about regulation, yet our results do shed some light on Americans’ attitudes toward drones. The greater popularity of drones compared to ground forces and aircraft indicates that Americans see these weapons platforms as being attractive, which casts doubt on whether they would want to relinquish the ability to employ drones unilaterally and without seeking approval. Respondents’ low confidence in international organizations, aside from NATO, is further reason to doubt that the American public would support a regulatory regime grounded in some international body.
Over three administrations and 16 years, there has been nothing as iconic in the United States’ forever war on terror as the matchstick-with-wings silhouette of the modern drone. Understanding the drone program has never been easy; the covert nature of some of the program, as well as a strong executive emphasis on the needs of national security, meant that even at its most transparent, the drone war was largely opaque. In its third report on drone policy, the Stimson Center finds that after a gradual movement towards more transparency by the end of President Obama’s second term, the Trump administration has fully reversed course.
The Pentagon says American airstrikes in Somalia have killed no civilians since President Trump accelerated attacks against Shabab militants there two years ago. Amnesty International investigated five of the more than 100 strikes carried out in Somalia since 2017 by drones and manned aircraft, and in just that small sampling found that at least 14 civilians were killed. The Pentagon says airstrikes by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State killed at least 1,257 civilians in Iraq and Syria as of the end of January. Airwars, a university-based monitoring group, estimates that those strikes killed at least 7,500 civilians in those countries. Those disparities show how poorly the American public understands the human cost of an air war fought largely by remote-controlled drones. Drones have been the main weapon in the counterterrorism fight for more than a decade. They kill extremists without risking American lives, making combat seem antiseptic on the home front. But the number of civilians killed in these attacks is shrouded in secrecy. President Trump has made it even harder to lift that shroud, by allowing the Central Intelligence Agency to keep secret how many civilians are killed in the agency’s airstrikes outside of the Afghan, Iraqi and Syrian war zones — in places like Yemen, the lawless border region of Pakistan and North Africa. President Barack Obama aggressively expanded drone use in these airstrikes. But he eventually came to understand the need for more transparency and accountability, and, under pressure, he put some sensible safeguards in place. Among them was a July 2016 order requiring the government to issue annual public reports on the civilian death tolls in those areas. Mr. Trump revoked that order this month. His National Security Council called it superfluous because Congress had subsequently passed a law mandating that the Pentagon publicly report any civilians killed in any of its operations. But that law covered only the Pentagon, not the separate C.I.A. drone campaign, which has broadened under Mr. Trump. Experts say that, under President Trump, airstrikes have surged in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, as well as in Somalia. In Yemen, it is unclear to what extent the Americans, as opposed to the Saudi-Emirati coalition, are responsible. In Afghanistan, the number of American strikes that killed or injured civilians more than doubled in the first nine months of 2018 compared with the corresponding period in the previous year and killed more than 150 civilians, according to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Mr. Trump has also eroded constraints on civilian casualties. Since taking office, he has rescinded rules that required the military and the C.I.A. operating outside of hot battlefields like Afghanistan and Iraq to limit their targets to high-level militants rather than foot soldiers. He also, by eliminating an elaborate interagency approval process, gave military commanders more authority to order drone strikes. Yet, even under the previous rules, no matter how precise the weapons, how careful the planners and how skilled the fighters, mistakes, faulty intelligence, even calculated decisions often led to civilians being killed. The official data ranges from none to maddeningly vague, and the safeguards to mitigate civilian deaths are insufficient. The military adopted an elaborate system under the Obama administration to minimize civilian casualties, including a requirement that forces have “near certainty” that no civilian will be harmed before launching an attack. But reporting by The Times and others in 2017 showed that the Pentagon had killed far more civilians in Iraq than it acknowledged. The Obama administration estimated that over its two terms drone strikes had killed between 64 and 116 civilians in 542 airstrikes outside the major war zones. Micah Zenko, co-author of a new book, “Clear and Present Safety,” calculated the real tally at roughly 324. Drones, for all their faults, are less indiscriminate than B-52s or almost any other weapon. But they are also a seductive tool, potentially tempting presidents and military commanders to inflict grave damage without sufficient forethought. A lack of transparency and accountability for civilian deaths helps enemies spin false narratives, makes it harder for allies to defend American actions and sets a bad example for other countries that are rapidly adding drones to their arsenals. It could also result in war crimes, as some critics have claimed. Congress needs to insist on better data as the Pentagon inspector general investigates civilian casualty reporting. There is no such thing as combat without risk. With drone combat, much of the risk falls on innocents. Americans need to understand the full cost and consequences of those risks.
The use of targeted killings by missile or drone is generally framed as an alternative to the deployment of US troops to kill or detain the suspect. While eliminating the risk to the potential captors, targeted assassinations also eliminate the option of taking suspects into custody, in which they might be questioned, held as a prisoner of war, or charged with a crime in order to stand trial. They occupy a different status than the prisoners held (p.154) at Guantánamo Bay, who are subject to torture, indefinite detention, and force-feeding to keep them alive, but subjugated. The targets represent not an enemy who must be coerced into surrendering, or a fugitive who must be brought to justice, but the subject of extermination. This is the relationship that Foucault designates as racism, which is a way to mark the “break between what must live and what must die” (Foucault 2003, 254) and also the necessity of the death of some to secure the lives of others. The health of one population (the posthuman warriors and those they ostensibly protect) is made possible by the death of another population (the suspected “terrorists”). However, the terrorists are not figured as a population per se, but rather as a set of individuals who are marked as those who have or would disregard the sovereign’s law, and who must be publicly, bodily, punished as a means of re-establishing the presence of the sovereign (Foucault 1979).
While the “terrorists” are targeted for death, a large number of the people actually killed in precision warfare are those whom we might consider “civilians” if such a term, associated with just war theory and international law, were still relevant and meaningful. The “spectacle” of punishment in bombing is the destruction of buildings and non-human targets; the death of people, whether soldiers or civilians with some important exceptions, is hidden from view. Whereas the just war tradition sees death in war as glorious sacrifice on behalf of the nation (Elshtain 1995 [1987]), deaths of those other than the enemy are mistakes or accidents in precision warfare, if they are seen to exist at all. Like “terrorists,” “enemy combatants,” “militants,” and others marked for death, those other than targets who are killed exist as killable through the production of posthuman precision bombers. Here, the concept of “civilian,” while still used to protest the killing of unintended victims, is not longer a useful category of analysis when killing is less about the distinction between “us” and “them,” friends and enemies, than the elimination of certain forms of life (see Dillon 2007b). Such bodies enter into the posthuman assemblage of precision warfare as an actively produced ignorance:in the discourse of precision warfare, “civilians” only exist insofar as assurances of looking out for their welfare are (p.159) used as a justification for certain practices of violence; few dead “civilians” are said to actually exist.9
There is also something deeply problematic in technocratic discourses that fetishize body counts, assuming that the suffering of the Pashtun people and the justice of the American bombing campaign can be measured and settled by numbers of bodies, especially civilian bodies. This is to marginalize kinds of suffering that turn people into a kind of living dead, as described below. Nevertheless, for what it is worth, Steven Coll (2014), writing in the New Yorker, puts the total number killed at between 2,000 and 4,000. The New America Foundation, which has a parsimonious protocol for confirming deaths in drone strikes, estimates that between 256 and 303 civilians were killed, with as many as 300 other deaths impossible to classify as combatant or noncombatant.14 The Bureau of Investigative Journalism, using a different estimation methodology, has a higher estimate: between 424 and 969 civilians killed.15
Of course, the majority of victims are local civilians. In Afghanistan and Pakistan drone strikes have killed countless children and wiped out so many wedding parties that it's become a sick joke. Estimates of the civilian casualty rate range from a third (by the New America Foundation) to 98 percent (terrorism expert Amir Mir). There is no evidence that a single "terrorist" has ever been killed by a drone - only the say-so of US and NATO spokesmen. Errors are inherent due to the principal feature of the technology: remoteness. Manned aerial warfare is notoriously inaccurate; pilots zooming close to the speed of sound tens of thousands of feet above the ground have little idea who or what they're shooting at. Drone operators have even less information than old-school pilots. Like a submariner peering out of a periscope, they are supposed to decide whether people live or die based on fuzzy images through layers of glass. They call it the "soda straw." Nowadays, staffing is a troubling challenge: it takes 19 analysts to study images and other data from one drone. In the future, a war could eliminate unemployment entirely: it will take approximately 2,00 men and women to process information from one drone equipped with "Gorgon stare" optics capable of scanning an entire city at once. First flown in 1994, the Predator became widely used only after 9/11 [GALLO/GETTY] There's also a huge gap in education, experience and culture. Virtual warriors require simple rules that don't apply when trying to kill jihadis. At the beginning of the US war against Afghanistan in 2001, for example, it was an article of faith within the Pentagon that men wearing black long-tailed turbans were Talibs. Dozens, possibly hundreds, of noncombatants were killed because of this incorrect assumption. In February 2002 a drone operator blew up a man because he was tall - as was Osama bin Laden. In fact, he and two other men killed were poor villagers gathering scrap metal. Again, this doesn't address the broader issue of whether it's okay to murder people simply because they are members of the Taliban. At least as interesting as the choice of target is whom the U.S. does not try to kill: the Talibikers. Unlike the wedding parties, houses and tribal councils that have been mistakenly incinerated by the aptly-named Hellfire missiles, Taliban bike gangs are easy to identify from the air. One or two hundred dirtbikes speeding across the desert toward a truck on an Afghan highway are unmistakable. Most Afghans, even those who oppose the US occupation, fear the Talibikers and resent being robbed at impromptu checkpoints. There have been a few scattershot drone strikes, nothing more. Why don't the CIA whiz kids make these easily-identified fighters a primary target? Afghans a low priority for US I posed the question to Afghan government officials. They told me that the same US military that blows $1 billion a week on the war won't lift a finger to save Afghan lives by providing basic security. "Afghan lives are worth nothing to the Americans," a provincial governor told me. Last week the United Nations announced that civilian casualties were up 15 percent during the first six months of 2011. If the same rate continues, this will be the worst year of the ten-year-long American occupation. A well-placed US military source confirms that Afghan security "isn't a priority, it isn't even much of a passing thought". Contrary to President Obama's claim that US is in Afghanistan in order to prevent the country from becoming a base for Al Qaeda and other extremist groups and to combat opium cultivation, he says that Afghanistan isn't about Afghanistan at all. "Afghanistan is a staging area for drone and other aerial strikes in western Pakistan," he says. "Nothing more, nothing less. Afghanistan is Bagram [airbase]." Under Obama the death toll has risen, worsening relations between the White House and its puppet president, Hamid Karzai. Beyond the horror of the deaths themselves, it would be impossible to overstate the contempt that ordinary people in nations like Afghanistan and Pakistan feel for the drone program. "Americans are cowards" was one refrain I heard last year. Real soldiers risk their lives. They do not send buzzing machines to kill people half a world away…people they know nothing about. Back in 2002, former CIA general counsel Jeffrey Smith worried about blowback. "If [Taliban leaders and soldiers are] dead, they're not talking to you, and you create more martyrs," he noted. Ongoing drone attacks "suggest that it's acceptable behavior to assassinate people…Assassination as a norm of international conduct exposes American leaders and Americans overseas." These days, the media gives little to no time or space to such concerns. Americans have moved into postmorality. Right or wrong? Who cares? Recently international law professor Mary Ellen O'Connell of Notre Dame University said that the new reliance on drones could prompt an already militaristic superpower to fight even more wars of choice. "I think this idea that somehow this technology is allowing us to kill in more places and ... aim at more targets is for me the fundamental ethical and legal problem." Meanwhile, adds Mary Dudziak of the University of Southern California’s Gould School of Law: "Drones are a technological step that further isolates the American people from military action, undermining political checks on…endless war." No casualties? No problem.
This large and at first sight “messy” Part VII is central to this anthology’s thesis. It encompasses everything from the routinized, bureaucratized, and utterly banal violence of children dying of hunger and maternal despair in Northeast Brazil (Scheper-Hughes, Chapter 33) to elderly African Americans dying of heat stroke in Mayor Daly’s version of US apartheid in Chicago’s South Side (Klinenberg, Chapter 38) to the racialized class hatred expressed by British Victorians in their olfactory disgust of the “smelly” working classes (Orwell, Chapter 36). In these readings violence is located in the symbolic and social structures that overdetermine and allow the criminalized drug addictions, interpersonal bloodshed, and racially patterned incarcerations that characterize the US “inner city” to be normalized (Bourgois, Chapter 37 and Wacquant, Chapter 39). Violence also takes the form of class, racial, political self-hatred and adolescent self-destruction (Quesada, Chapter 35), as well as of useless (i.e. preventable), rawly embodied physical suffering, and death (Farmer, Chapter 34). Absolutely central to our approach is a blurring of categories and distinctions between wartime and peacetime violence. Close attention to the “little” violences produced in the structures, habituses, and mentalites of everyday life shifts our attention to pathologies of class, race, and gender inequalities. More important, it interrupts the voyeuristic tendencies of “violence studies” that risk publicly humiliating the powerless who are often forced into complicity with social and individual pathologies of power because suffering is often a solvent of human integrity and dignity. Thus, in this anthology we are positing a violence continuum comprised of a multitude of “small wars and invisible genocides” (see also Scheper- Hughes 1996; 1997; 2000b) conducted in the normative social spaces of public schools, clinics, emergency rooms, hospital wards, nursing homes, courtrooms, public registry offices, prisons, detention centers, and public morgues. The violence continuum also refers to the ease with which humans are capable of reducing the socially vulnerable into expendable nonpersons and assuming the license - even the duty - to kill, maim, or soul-murder. We realize that in referring to a violence and a genocide continuum we are flying in the face of a tradition of genocide studies that argues for the absolute uniqueness of the Jewish Holocaust and for vigilance with respect to restricted purist use of the term genocide itself (see Kuper 1985; Chaulk 1999; Fein 1990; Chorbajian 1999). But we hold an opposing and alternative view that, to the contrary, it is absolutely necessary to make just such existential leaps in purposefully linking violent acts in normal times to those of abnormal times. Hence the title of our volume: Violence in War and in Peace. If (as we concede) there is a moral risk in overextending the concept of “genocide” into spaces and corners of everyday life where we might not ordinarily think to find it (and there is), an even greater risk lies in failing to sensitize ourselves, in misrecognizing protogenocidal practices and sentiments daily enacted as normative behavior by “ordinary” good-enough citizens. Peacetime crimes, such as prison construction sold as economic development to impoverished communities in the mountains and deserts of California, or the evolution of the criminal industrial complex into the latest peculiar institution for managing race relations in the United States (Waquant, Chapter 39), constitute the “small wars and invisible genocides” to which we refer. This applies to African American and Latino youth mortality statistics in Oakland, California, Baltimore, Washington DC, and New York City. These are “invisible” genocides not because they are secreted away or hidden from view, but quite the opposite. As Wittgenstein observed, the things that are hardest to perceive are those which are right before our eyes and therefore taken for granted. In this regard, Bourdieu’s partial and unfinished theory of violence (see Chapters 32 and 42) as well as his concept of misrecognition is crucial to our task. By including the normative everyday forms of violence hidden in the minutiae of “normal” social practices - in the architecture of homes, in gender relations, in communal work, in the exchange of gifts, and so forth - Bourdieu forces us to reconsider the broader meanings and status of violence, especially the links between the violence of everyday life and explicit political terror and state repression, Similarly, Basaglia’s notion of “peacetime crimes” - crimini di pace - imagines a direct relationship between wartime and peacetime violence. Peacetime crimes suggests the possibility that war crimes are merely ordinary, everyday crimes of public consent applied systematically and dramatically in the extreme context of war. Consider the parallel uses of rape during peacetime and wartime, or the family resemblances between the legalized violence of US immigration and naturalization border raids on “illegal aliens” versus the US government- engineered genocide in 1838, known as the Cherokee “Trail of Tears.” Peacetime crimes suggests that everyday forms of state violence make a certain kind of domestic peace possible. Internal “stability” is purchased with the currency of peacetime crimes, many of which take the form of professionally applied “strangle-holds.” Everyday forms of state violence during peacetime make a certain kind of domestic “peace” possible. It is an easy-to-identify peacetime crime that is usually maintained as a public secret by the government and by a scared or apathetic populace. Most subtly, but no less politically or structurally, the phenomenal growth in the United States of a new military, postindustrial prison industrial complex has taken place in the absence of broad-based opposition, let alone collective acts of civil disobedience. The public consensus is based primarily on a new mobilization of an old fear of the mob, the mugger, the rapist, the Black man, the undeserving poor. How many public executions of mentally deficient prisoners in the United States are needed to make life feel more secure for the affluent? What can it possibly mean when incarceration becomes the “normative” socializing experience for ethnic minority youth in a society, i.e., over 33 percent of young African American men (Prison Watch 2002). In the end it is essential that we recognize the existence of a genocidal capacity among otherwise good-enough humans and that we need to exercise a defensive hypervigilance to the less dramatic, permitted, and even rewarded everyday acts of violence that render participation in genocidal acts and policies possible (under adverse political or economic conditions), perhaps more easily than we would like to recognize. Under the violence continuum we include, therefore, all expressions of radical social exclusion, dehumanization, depersonalization, pseudospeciation, and reification which normalize atrocious behavior and violence toward others. A constant self-mobilization for alarm, a state of constant hyperarousal is, perhaps, a reasonable response to Benjamin’s view of late modern history as a chronic “state of emergency” (Taussig, Chapter 31). We are trying to recover here the classic anagogic thinking that enabled Erving Goffman, Jules Henry, C. Wright Mills, and Franco Basaglia among other mid-twentieth-century radically critical thinkers, to perceive the symbolic and structural relations, i.e., between inmates and patients, between concentration camps, prisons, mental hospitals, nursing homes, and other “total institutions.” Making that decisive move to recognize the continuum of violence allows us to see the capacity and the willingness - if not enthusiasm - of ordinary people, the practical technicians of the social consensus, to enforce genocidal-like crimes against categories of rubbish people. There is no primary impulse out of which mass violence and genocide are born, it is ingrained in the common sense of everyday social life. The mad, the differently abled, the mentally vulnerable have often fallen into this category of the unworthy living, as have the very old and infirm, the sick-poor, and, of course, the despised racial, religious, sexual, and ethnic groups of the moment. Erik Erikson referred to “pseudo- speciation” as the human tendency to classify some individuals or social groups as less than fully human - a prerequisite to genocide and one that is carefully honed during the unremark- able peacetimes that precede the sudden, “seemingly unintelligible” outbreaks of mass violence. Collective denial and misrecognition are prerequisites for mass violence and genocide. But so are formal bureaucratic structures and professional roles. The practical technicians of everyday violence in the backlands of Northeast Brazil (Scheper-Hughes, Chapter 33), for example, include the clinic doctors who prescribe powerful tranquilizers to fretful and frightfully hungry babies, the Catholic priests who celebrate the death of “angel-babies,” and the municipal bureaucrats who dispense free baby coffins but no food to hungry families. Everyday violence encompasses the implicit, legitimate, and routinized forms of violence inherent in particular social, economic, and political formations. It is close to what Bourdieu (1977, 1996) means by “symbolic violence,” the violence that is often “nus-recognized” for something else, usually something good. Everyday violence is similar to what Taussig (1989) calls “terror as usual.” All these terms are meant to reveal a public secret - the hidden links between violence in war and violence in peace, and between war crimes and “peace-time crimes.” Bourdieu (1977) finds domination and violence in the least likely places - in courtship and marriage, in the exchange of gifts, in systems of classification, in style, art, and culinary taste- the various uses of culture. Violence, Bourdieu insists, is everywhere in social practice. It is misrecognized because its very everydayness and its familiarity render it invisible. Lacan identifies “rneconnaissance” as the prerequisite of the social. The exploitation of bachelor sons, robbing them of autonomy, independence, and progeny, within the structures of family farming in the European countryside that Bourdieu escaped is a case in point (Bourdieu, Chapter 42; see also Scheper-Hughes, 2000b; Favret-Saada, 1989). Following Gramsci, Foucault, Sartre, Arendt, and other modern theorists of power-vio- lence, Bourdieu treats direct aggression and physical violence as a crude, uneconomical mode of domination; it is less efficient and, according to Arendt (1969), it is certainly less legitimate. While power and symbolic domination are not to be equated with violence - and Arendt argues persuasively that violence is to be understood as a failure of power - violence, as we are presenting it here, is more than simply the expression of illegitimate physical force against a person or group of persons. Rather, we need to understand violence as encompassing all forms of “controlling processes” (Nader 1997b) that assault basic human freedoms and individual or collective survival. Our task is to recognize these gray zones of violence which are, by definition, not obvious. Once again, the point of bringing into the discourses on genocide everyday, normative experiences of reification, depersonalization, institutional confinement, and acceptable death is to help answer the question: What makes mass violence and genocide possible? In this volume we are suggesting that mass violence is part of a continuum, and that it is socially incremental and often experienced by perpetrators, collaborators, bystanders - and even by victims themselves - as expected, routine, even justified. The preparations for mass killing can be found in social sentiments and institutions from the family, to schools, churches, hospitals, and the military. They harbor the early “warning signs” (Charney 1991), the “priming” (as Hinton, ed., 2002 calls it), or the “genocidal continuum” (as we call it) that push social consensus toward devaluing certain forms of human life and lifeways from the refusal of social support and humane care to vulnerable “social parasites” (the nursing home elderly, “welfare queens,” undocumented immigrants, drug addicts) to the militarization of everyday life (super-maximum-security prisons, capital punishment; the technologies of heightened personal security, including the house gun and gated communities; and reversed feelings of victimization).
Today in the Americas there are high-levels of social and political tension both north and south, and between democracies and dictatorships. The Hemisphere is home to 35 states, all democracies except two dictatorships (Cuba and Venezuela), and one that is transitioning toward dictatorship (Nicaragua). These latter are governments that repress people through conventional means such as torture and political persecution, as well as through less conventional patterns of repression such as hunger and disease.
Wallensteen’s examination of the characteristics of particularist periods provides significant additional evidence that the steps-to-war analysis is on the right track. Realist practices are associated with war, and peaceful systems are associated with an emphasis on other practices. Peaceful systems are exemplified by the use of practices like buffer states, compensation, and concerts of power that bring major states together to form a network of institutions that provide governance for the system. The creation of rules of the game that can handle certain kinds of issues – territorial and ideological questions – and/or keep them off the agenda seems to be a crucial variable in producing peace.¶   Additional evidence on the import of rules and norms is provided in a series of studies by Kegley and Raymond (1982, 1984, 1986, 1990) that are operationally more precise than Wallensteen’s (1984) analysis. Kegley and Raymond provide evidence that when states accept norms, the incidence of war and military confrontation is reduced. They find that peace is associated with periods in which alliance norms are considered binding and the unilateral abrogation of commitments and treaties illegitimate. The rules imposed by the global political culture in these periods result in fewer militarized disputes and wars between major states. In addition, the wars that occur are kept at lower levels of severity, magnitude, and duration (i.e. they are limited wars).¶ Kegley and Raymond attempt to measure the extent to which global cultural norms restrain major states by looking at whether international law and commentary on it sees treaties and alliances as binding. They note that there have been two traditions in international law – pacta sunt servanda, which maintains that agreements are binding, and clausa rebus sic stantibus, which says that treaties are signed “as matters stand” and that any change in circumstances since the treaty was signed permits a party to withdraw unilaterally. One of the advantages the Kegley-Raymond studies have over Wallensteen (1984) is that they are able to develop reliable measures of the extent to which in any given half-decade that tradition in international law emphasizes the rebus or pacta sunt servanda tradition. This indicator is important not only because it focuses in on the question of unilateral actions, but because it can serve as an indicator of how well the peace system is working. The pacta sunt servanda tradition implies a more constraining political system and robust institutional context which should provide an alternative to war.¶ Kegley and Raymond (1982: 586) find that in half-decades (from 1820 to 1914) when treaties are considered non-binding (rebus), wars between major states occur in every half-decade (100 percent), but when treaties are considered binding (pacta sunt servanda), wars between major states occur in only 50 percent of the half-decades. The Cramer’s V for this relationship is .66. When the sample is expanded to include all states in the central system, Cramer’s V is 0.44, indicating that global norms have more impact on preventing war between major states. Nevertheless, among central system states between 1820 and 1939, war occurred in 93 percent of the half-decades where the rebus tradition dominated and in only 60 percent of the half-decades where the pacta sunt sevanda tradition dominated.¶ In a subsequent analysis of militarized disputes from 1820 to 1914, Kegley and Raymond (1984: 207-11) find that there is a negative relationship between binding norms and the frequency and scope of disputes short of war. In periods when the global culture accepts the pacta sunt servanda tradition as the norm, the number of military disputes goes down and the number of major states involved in a dispute decreases. Although the relationship is of moderate strength, it is not eliminated by other variables, namely alliance flexibility. As Kegley and Raymond (1984: 213) point out, this means “that in periods when the opportunistic renunciation of commitments” is condoned, militarized disputes are more likely to occur and to spread. The finding that norms can reduce the frequency and scope of disputes is significant evidence that rules can permit actors to successfully control and manage disputes so that they are not contagious and they do not escalate to war. These findings are consistent with Wallensteen’s (1984) and suggest that one of the ways rules help prevent war is by reducing, limiting, and managing disputes short of war.
History shows that how states adopt and use new military capabilities is often influenced by how other states have—or have not—used them in the past. Furthermore, norms can deter states from acquiring new technologies.72 Norms—sometimes but not always codified as legal regimes—have dissuaded states from deploying blinding lasers and landmines, as well as chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons. A well-articulated and internationally supported normative framework, bolstered by  a strong U.S. example, can shape armed drone proliferation and employment in the coming decades. Such norms would not hinder U.S. freedom of action; rather, they would internationalize already-necessary domestic policy reforms and, of course, they would be acceptable only insofar as the limitations placed reciprocally on U.S. drones furthered U.S. objectives. And even if hostile states do not accept norms regulating drone use, the existence of an international normative framework, and U.S. compliance with that framework, would preserve Washington’s ability to apply diplomatic pressure. Models for developing such a framework would be based in existing international laws that emphasize the principles of necessity, proportionality, and distinction—to which the United States claims to adhere for its drone strikes—and should be informed by comparable efforts in the realms of cyber and space.¶ In short, a world characterized by the proliferation of armed drones—used with little transparency or constraint—would undermine core U.S. interests, such as preventing armed conflict, promoting human rights, and strengthening international legal regimes. It would be a world in which targeted killings occur with impunity against anyone deemed an “enemy” by states or nonstate actors, without accountability for legal justification, civilian casualties, and proportionality. Perhaps more troubling, it would be a world where such lethal force no longer heeds the borders of sovereign states. Because of drones’ inherent advantages over other weapons platforms, states and nonstate actors would be much more likely to use lethal force against the United States and its allies.
To implement this covert program, the administration has adopted a tool that lowers the threshold for lethal force by reducing the cost and risk of combat. This still-expanding counterterrorism use of drones to kill people, including its own citizens, outside of traditionally defined battlefields and established protocols for warfare, has given friends and foes a green light to employ these aircraft in extraterritorial operations that could not only affect relations between the nation-states involved but also destabilize entire regions and potentially upset geopolitical order.¶ Hyperbole? Consider this: Iran, with the approval of Damascus, carries out a lethal strike on anti-Syrian forces inside Syria; Russia picks off militants tampering with oil and gas lines in Ukraine or Georgia; Turkey arms a U.S.-provided Predator to kill Kurdish militants in northern Iraq who it believes are planning attacks along the border. Label the targets as terrorists, and in each case, Tehran, Moscow, and Ankara may point toward Washington and say, we learned it by watching you. In Pakistan, Yemen, and Afghanistan.¶ This is the unintended consequence of American drone warfare. For all of the attention paid to the drone program in recent weeks—about Americans on the target list (there are none at this writing) and the executive branch’s legal authority to kill by drone outside war zones (thin, by officials’ own private admission)—what goes undiscussed is Washington’s deliberate failure to establish clear and demonstrable rules for itself that would at minimum create a globally relevant standard for delineating between legitimate and rogue uses of one of the most awesome military robotics capabilities of this generation.
The world is now approaching a similar point with drones as the race for this technology is resetting the terms of global competition and quietly altering the rules of the game for many long-simmering conflicts and rivalries. This is happening in part because few, if any, states will use drones in the way that the United States currently does, as a way to ruthlessly target militant networks in ungoverned territories. Rather, the proliferation of drones will also be accompanied by rapid adaption of drones to new, and perhaps unforeseen, civilian and military uses, which will have three consequences for the international system. First, the proliferation of drones will reset the rules and norms governing surveillance and reconnaissance and invite new counter-measures that may paradoxically increase uncertainty between regional rivals over the long run. Second, as a lowcost, apparently low-risk form of technology, drones will become increasingly useful to governments in testing the strategic commitments and the nerves of their rivals. Even today, a number of governments and rebel groups facing regional rivalries have started to use drones in ways that chip away at the foundations of previously stable deterrent relationships. Third, the worldwide proliferation of drones in contested airspace, and the increasing risk that a drone will have an accident with a civilian aircraft, multiplies the chances of a conflict spiral stemming from an accident or drone misuse. Given these risks, it is in Washington’s interest to take a leading role in slowing the race for drones and developing new legal, institutional and normative mechanisms to govern drone usage and sale in the future
Lastly, drones might  reduce the diplomatic fallout associated with the use of force. In particular, drones allow the country flying them to maintain some semblance of diplomatic cover given that the pilots are thousands of miles away rather than directly flying overhead. Although countries such as Pakistan sometimes publicly protest about drones operating above their territory, such complaints are most likely displays of domestic political theater.71 As a number of sources suggest, Pakistan has approved foreign drone strikes on its territory; indeed, the high frequency of such strikes suggests that at least tacit approval would have been essential.72 Yet drones give the government conducting the strikes greater plausible deniability than alternatives such as ground forces, which require a considerable logistical footprint, or manned aircraft. The amount of diplomatic cover that drones provide obviously has limits—a CH-4 with a Chinese flag painted on its side is still a Chinese military platform—but the belief that drones provide some degree of diplomatic cover could make countries more likely to use them.
Over the long term, however, the positive effects of increased drone surveillance on deterrent relationships are less clear. As the drone technology improves the flow of information about what other actors are doing, there will be pressure for more aggressive (and risky) counter-measures designed to block the gaze of drones, as well as calls for more aggressive operational security about controversial activities, such as building nuclear programs. Today, most drones can be noticed when flying above targets and are countered by a range of simple counter-attacks. States such as Israel have shot down drones, and a number of others have scrambled aircraft to force drones to leave their airspace. Iran has also claimed to have shot down both the ScanEagle and RQ-170 U.S. drones and has even displayed the wreckage for the international media. Potential American rivals are considering new steps to ensure that they can take to shoot drones from the sky if they are detected in their airspace. Russia has developed a new model of its Tor M2 surface-to-air missile defense system, designed deliberately to shoot down drones.59 China has also developed a home-made laser defense system capable of shooting down U.S. drones.60 Another response in the future might be the development of counter-UAV operations in which drones are developed specifically for the purpose of detecting and destroying other drones.61 A consequence of a proliferation of drones might be a dangerous sequence of UAV operations and counter-UAV strikes by adversaries, thus, setting the stage for conflict spirals and dangerous accidents.
Commercial drone applications advertised by companies such as Amazon give the illusion of a technology that is ubiquitous and inevitable. If drone technology indeed diffuses easily, then efforts to control its spread—whether through tight export controls or pressure on major producers to restrict drone transfers—are unnecessary and even misguided. In a world of rapid technology diffusion, countries will inevitably acquire the technology, and the United States has financial incentives to generate the greatest market share for its domestic industry. However, there are high barriers to entry for some countries that wish to join the armed drone market, which explain a low procurement rate despite the intrinsic advantages of drones and countries’ stated ambitions to obtain them.
Building on the intuition of Adner’s work in management, in this article we have argued that the diffusion of military innovations depend on a country’s capacity to meet both platform and adoption challenges. We have tested our argument on the diffusion of three types of UAVs. Our analysis questions the consensus among scholars and analysts on the ease of building and employing drones, and hence on the apocalyptic views on the coming diffusion of drone warfare. Available data shows, first, that even wealthy and advanced countries like the US and its NATO allies have struggled and in some cases even failed in designing, developing and manufacturing the three types of UAVs we have analyzed. Second, their employment has raised many salient challenges that these countries have struggled to address – from bandwidth constraints to organizational and doctrinal challenges related to the exploitation of real-time information in modern warfare. Since these countries possess the financial resources, some of the most capable armed forces in the world and extensive experience, we conclude that poorer and less developed countries are unlikely to fare any better in any of these two realms, and likely are going to experience even more daunting problems. At the theoretical level, our analysis speaks not only to the case of drones but to military innovations more in general. First, in contrast to the conventional view among IR scholars and consistent with the works of Caverley, Gholz and Neuman, we have argued that designing, developing and manufacturing weapon systems poses significant challenges and require highly specific industrial and scientific capabilities that cannot be easily borrowed from other fields. Second, consistent with the work of Posen, we have argued that infrastructural support plays a critical role in enabling or constraining the diffusion of some military innovations. Third, and consistent with the works of Horowitz and Goldman, organizational factors can affect the adoption of some weapon systems, ultimately slowing down their proliferation or compromising their operational effectiveness. In this respect, however, our work suggests that accumulated experience, rather than penalizing incumbents, may represent a costly entry-barrier for newcomers. These considerations have important implications for the broader research agenda on the diffusion of military innovations. In particular, our work suggests that the speed and width of diffusion of military innovations is a product of the interaction between platform and adoption challenges – two aspects that the existing literature in IR has significantly underestimated (by assuming that the imitation of military technology is relatively easy) or even neglected (infrastructural requirements).
According to a large and growing consensus among scholars and policymakers, unmanned autonomous vehicles (UAVs) are facile to produce and inexpensive to purchase—two features that are allegedly promoting their swift proliferation. As Shawn Brimley, Ben FitzGerald, and Ely Ratner stress, this is “not a future trend . . . [as these] capabilities are being fielded—right now.” From Russia to Iran, from China to North Korea, to even groups like Hamas and Hezbollah, many U.S. enemies and adversaries are in fact developing or employing various types of drones. From Russia to Iran, from China to North Korea, to even groups like Hamas and Hezbollah, many U.S. enemies and adversaries are in fact developing or employing various types of drones. Such developments deserve attention because of their potentially disruptive implications for international politics, as the spread of drone warfare could redistribute military power at the global level and eventually promote instability and conflict. According to T. X. Hammes, for instance, given “the low cost and wide dissemination of the knowledge, software, and hardware, we have to assume both state and non-state actors will use [drones] against us.” The literature in International Relations (IR) theory widely supports these concerns. According to the mainstream academic view, military technology (the hardware) spreads easily and quickly, and globalization—along with the information, communication, and technology (ICT) revolution—further accelerates and facilitates this process. In this article we question this perspective. Drawing from the literature in management, we argue that IR scholars have largely underestimated both the technological challenges of developing advanced weapon systems (platform challenge) and the infrastructural support that they require (adoption challenge)—ultimately downplaying the material obstacles to the proliferation of military technology. Based on these intuitions, we develop a theoretical framework that explains why and when some military innovations spread quickly and/or widely and why and when others do not.
UCAVs raise three types of adoption challenges. First, like LAMs and ISR drones, in order to deliver a marked and enduring combat advantage, they require modern battle-networks, C4 architectures, organizational codes, appropriate bureaucratic structures, specific military doctrines, skilled personnel, and the support of other manned combat aircrafts, among others. Second, UCAVs will be autonomous, not remotely controlled. This is going to trigger some peculiar challenges. Specifically, autonomous systems must be capable of contextual decision-making since they interact with a dynamic environment in a nondeterministic manner. Thus, traditional development and procurement approaches, based on full-path regression, are unfit. Algorithms are in fact “only optimal for well understood or modeled situations.” Significant progress in the discipline of human robotics interaction, and in the area of human-machine interfaces will be then necessary to enable “the desired correct behavior” or predict “what will happen if the environment changes radically.” However, given the width and depth of this challenge and of the fields entailed – spanning from “unmanned systems, human factors, psychology, cognitive science, communication, human computer interaction, computer supported work groups and sociology” – the organizational, technological and financial challenges related to UCAVs are likely to be massive and hence unaffordable for possibly most countries beside the US. Third, autonomous systems will not “achieve their full potential military utility […] unless they can go where manned aircraft go with the same freedom of navigation, responsiveness, and flexibility.” This requires countries to integrate their UCAVs fleet into their National Airspace System (NAS) outside of restricted areas (like airbases) both at home and abroad. However, this casts a wide set of challenges. In 2004, the Defense Science Board already highlighted the need of appropriate regulatory frameworks in this respect. Yet, while the US unmanned fleets have continued to grow in this period, “efforts to achieve increasing access to the NAS have not progressed to meet that demand.” Several reasons account for this delay. Primarily, onboard anti-collision systems are lengthy, difficult and expensive to develop. Moreover, the organizational and financial challenges of adapting mission planning and C3 systems to high intensity mixed fleet operations of manned and unmanned UAVs are enormous. UCAVs, in comparison to remotely piloted vehicles, further complicate this issue as they raise problems about control and responsibility. European countries have faced similar obstacles in the integration of UAVs into their national air space. Poorer and less developed countries are unlikely to fare any better given that they often experience safety problems even with traditional commercial aviation.
A war with China is a real possibility. All it might take is the kind of near collision between United States and Chinese naval vessels that happened recently in the East China Sea or a dog fight between Japanese and Chinese fighter planes in the skies over the disputed Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea. It could also start with a confrontation between Philippine and Chinese vessels in energy-rich parts of the South China Sea now claimed by Beijing. There have been many close calls lately as China begins to assert itself around the world, and most experts admit that once the genie is out of the bottle it will be impossible to put it back in. This may have already occurred. In December 2012, Japan scrambled fighters after Chinese surveillance planes were spotted over the Senkaku Islands, territory China has since declared a Chinese air defense zone. Japan has been concerned by China’s use of drones close to its airspace and has vowed to retaliate by deploying U.S. made drones like the Global Kitty Hawk it hopes to buy from Washington. China has been developing its own drones, most likely with stolen U.S. technology. Some experts have forecast there will be a drone war in the region before long. Since his inauguration, President Barack Obama, like his predecessor, George W. Bush, has paid little heed to China’s growing naval ambitions. He has ignored repeated warnings from allies like India, Japan, Australia, Vietnam, the Philippines and South Korea that the Chinese have been building a formidable military that has been shaped specifically to dominate the Western Pacific. Hard Assets Alliance Neocons, who want America to continue to meddle around the world, issued warnings as far back as 2005 when Robert D. Kaplan wrote in The Atlantic Monthly that if China moved into the Pacific it would encounter a “U.S. Navy and Air Force unwilling to budge from the coastal shelf of the Asian mainland,” resulting in a “replay of the decades-long Cold War, with a center of gravity not in the heart of Europe but among Pacific atolls.” In AMERICAN FREE PRESS in 2007, this reporter wrote that China was not many years away from challenging U.S. dominance in Asia. At the time, a Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) task force had recommended the U.S. needed to “defeat China swiftly and decisively in any military conflict.” The CFR recommended expanding U.S. forces into Asia and shifting the balance of its naval and maritime power from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Globalists also wanted the U.S. to “invest heavily in new technologies appropriate for a naval and air battle with the Chinese.” Since 2007, with an eye to defeating the U.S. in a war in the region, China has greatly expanded its short-and medium-range ballistic missile arsenal, giving it the capability to target all U.S. bases in Japan, Taiwan, South Korea and the Philippines. It has also new anti-ship missiles capable of destroying U.S. aircraft carriers. By using an overwhelming number of short-and medium-range missiles, the Chinese could destroy U.S. bases and make resupply difficult in a future conflict. As the National Air Space Intelligence Center has pointed out, “China has the most active and diverse ballistic missile development program in the world.” A sign of how the U.S. might react in the opening exchanges of a conflict was contained in a Pentagon document leaked to The Washington Post in 2012. It talked of a plan that envisioned the U.S. destroying China’s surveillance and missile targeting capabilities “deep inside the country.” The plan talked of a “blinding campaign” followed by a massive naval and air assault—the same “shock and awe” tactic used against Iraq, which resulted in scores of dead civilians. The assumption here is that China would not go nuclear once the missiles started flying. The bottom line is this could be the defining war of the 20th century if Washington refuses to bring U.S. troops and ships home and let Asia sort out its own troubles.
China's demonstration of its willingness and capacity to use force, albeit in modest doses, suggests that it might be expected to escalate first. The fact that Beijing has an unconvincing claim in the Senkaku/Diaoyu dispute should not be a source of comfort because, as Taylor Fravel observes, it is in such weak positions that the Chinese leadership has proven more likely to employ violence.20 And Japanese escalation could not be ruled out if Tokyo saw China's actions as part of a new and more assertive pattern of behaviour that signalled a commitment to upping the ante. In their contribution to these judgements, political leaders on both sides would probably be unable to act with cool detachment, due to domestic pressure from nationalists. Chinese analysts often explain to outsiders that measures overseas governments characterise as too assertive are seen by these nationalists as too reserved. In any incident that gains public attention, Beijing is compelled to strike a bargain between those internal and external expectations. A minor concession designed to placate a domestic audience could easily be interpreted by Tokyo as serious escalation. There is also the prospect of Japanese misjudgement of a similar kind. Tokyo's nationalisation of the Senkaku/ Diaoyu Islands, in 2012, was partly an attempt to ward off even more provocative acts by nationalists. But this backfired. Partially because of a deep distrust, it is possible that in a severe crisis, any use of the JSDF (even one designed to lower the temperature) would be read as escalation. The political leaderships on both sides also face two more problems that hinder their ability to effectively manage Sino-Japanese interaction. The first is that they have lacked a strong pattern of contact at senior levels, especially between heads of government. At the time of writing, speculation was growing that Abe and Chinese President Xi Jinping would meet briefly at the November 2014 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, but this would have been the exception to what resembled a Chinese boycott. Japan and China also lack an emergency communication mechanism that would reduce the chances of a misunderstanding between their armed forces in the event of a sudden, serious maritime crisis. In addition to the frequent external calls for a system of this sort, Japan has continually supported the idea, only to be rebuffed by China. In September 2014, the two countries agreed to resume discussions on the subject but, given their level of distrust, there is no guarantee such a mechanism will be used even if it is established. The first obstacle is partly the product of another problem: the absence of an agreement that recognises the dangers in Sino-Japanese relations and the urgent need for greater cooperation. In the evolving Cold War relationship between Washington and Moscow, that need was most clearly illustrated by the Cuban Missile Crisis, which helped create a partnership based on, in Coral Bell's words, ‘consciousness between the dominant powers that they have solid common interests as well as sharp conflicting interests’.21 The establishment of this political consciousness was arguably more important than the installation of the famous hotline. In Bell's view, some of the seeds of this approach were planted far earlier in the post-war period. The admission by the two superpowers that their relationship was indeed adversarial had been brought home by the time that the Truman Doctrine was announced, in 1947.22 However, the notion that there needed to be some sort of adverse ‘partnership’ (a term taken from Marshall Shulman) would come as the crises they were involved in grew more serious. China and Japan's frequent admonitions of each other (including their use of absurd Harry Potter analogies) might suggest that the countries treat each other as adversaries.23 But there are at least two kinds of denial involved here. The first has been Japan's official position that there is no dispute with China over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. There has been logic in this approach: acknowledging the existence of the disagreement (which everyone is aware of) would grant China a negotiation position on the future sovereignty of the islands. The problem is that this stance also reduces the scope for effective cooperation, as it gives the impression that conflict resolution is unnecessary. This leaves Japan with a real conundrum, reflected in recent criticism that the Abe government might concede too much ground if it finally acknowledges that China has a different position.24 The second form of denial is China's avowed view that its rise avoids the tragedy of great-power politics, which in the past has resulted in major conflict.25 This position is dangerous because it encourages the perception that Beijing is free to commit itself to increasingly provocative actions without seriously risking confrontation. Both of these denial hazards are exacerbated by the insufficient sense of danger in Beijing and Tokyo about the possibility of an outbreak of violence. There is little sign that the neighbours have noticed the brink from which they need to step back. This likely fosters excessive confidence that they can continue to taunt each other without coming to blows, any threats of force are permitted and bluffs will not be called. Goldstein is right to be concerned about ‘indications that Chinese analysts overestimate the ease with which military actions can be used to send signals, and … underestimate the escalation risks that could result if the signalling action goes awry or is misunderstood.’26 In this context, the absence of a cautionary tale – a recent war or serious crisis involving Asia's major powers – could prove to be a problem. These factors might lead to escalation after the first shots have been fired. A lack of effective communication at the political level would curtail leaders' ability to coordinate a ceasefire. Their lack of trust would create suspicion that any stabilisation proposal was a ruse. The lack of an informal tradition of recognising, let alone managing, their adversarial partnership would also hinder political control of escalation. At this precarious point, other factors are likely to kick in, further increasing the danger. There is almost no question that curbing domestic nationalism would become an even greater challenge for leaders in both countries during the onset of even minor hostilities, and there is also a possibility that one or both leaderships would be tempted to exploit a heightened crisis for domestic reasons. An initial act of violence would put the other side under significant pressure to respond in kind (at the very least).
It's now been a year since Japan's previously ruling liberal government purchased three of the Senkaku Islands to prevent a nationalist and provocative Tokyo mayor from doing so himself. The move was designed to dodge a potential crisis with China, which claims "indisputable sovereignty" over the islands it calls the Diaoyus. Disregarding the Japanese government's intent, Beijing has reacted to the "nationalization" of the islands by flooding the surrounding waters and airspace with Chinese vessels in an effort to undermine Japan's de facto administration, which has persisted since the reversion of Okinawa from American control in 1971. Chinese incursions have become so frequent that the Japanese Air Self-Defense Forces (JASDF) are now scrambling jet fighters on a near-daily basis in response. In the midst of this heightened tension, you could be forgiven for overlooking the news early in September that Japanese F-15s had again taken flight after Beijing graciously commemorated the one-year anniversary of Tokyo's purchase by sending an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) toward the islands. But this wasn't just another day at the office in the contested East China Sea: this was the first known case of a Chinese drone approaching the Senkakus. Without a doubt, China's drone adventure 100-miles north of the Senkakus was significant because it aggravated already abysmal relations between Tokyo and Beijing. Japanese officials responded to the incident by suggesting that Japan might have to place government personnel on the islands, a red line for Beijing that would have been unthinkable prior to the past few years of Chinese assertiveness. But there's a much bigger and more pernicious cycle in motion. The introduction of indigenous drones into Asia's strategic environment -- now made official by China's maiden unmanned provocation -- will bring with it additional sources of instability and escalation to the fiercely contested South and East China Seas. Even though no government in the region wants to participate in major power war, there is widespread and growing concern that military conflict could result from a minor incident that spirals out of control. Unmanned systems could be just this trigger. They are less costly to produce and operate than their manned counterparts, meaning that we're likely to see more crowded skies and seas in the years ahead. UAVs also tend to encourage greater risk-taking, given that a pilot's life is not at risk. But being unmanned has its dangers: any number of software or communications failures could lead a mission awry. Combine all that with inexperienced operators and you have a perfect recipe for a mistake or miscalculation in an already tense strategic environment. The underlying problem is not just the drones themselves. Asia is in the midst of transitioning to a new warfighting regime with serious escalatory potential. China's military modernization is designed to deny adversaries freedom of maneuver over, on, and under the East and South China Seas. Although China argues that its strategy is primarily defensive, the capabilities it is choosing to acquire to create a "defensive" perimeter -- long-range ballistic and cruise missiles, aircraft carriers, submarines -- are acutely offensive in nature. During a serious crisis when tensions are high, China would have powerful incentives to use these capabilities, particularly missiles, before they were targeted by the United States or another adversary. The problem is that U.S. military plans and posture have the potential to be equally escalatory, as they would reportedly aim to "blind" an adversary -- disrupting or destroying command and control nodes at the beginning of a conflict. At the same time, the increasingly unstable balance of military power in the Pacific is exacerbated by the (re)emergence of other regional actors with their own advanced military capabilities. Countries that have the ability and resources to embark on rapid modernization campaigns (e.g., Japan, South Korea, Indonesia) are well on the way. This means that in addition to two great powers vying for military advantage, the region features an increasingly complex set of overlapping military-technical competitions that are accelerating tensions, adding to uncertainty and undermining stability. This dangerous military dynamic will only get worse as more disruptive military technologies appear, including the rapid diffusion of unmanned and increasingly autonomous aerial and submersible vehicles coupled with increasingly effective offensive cyberspace capabilities. Of particular concern is not only the novelty of these new technologies, but the lack of well-established norms for their use in conflict. Thankfully, the first interaction between a Chinese UAV and manned Japanese fighters passed without major incident. But it did raise serious questions that neither nation has likely considered in detail. What will constrain China's UAV incursions from becoming increasingly assertive and provocative? How will either nation respond in a scenario where an adversary downs a UAV? And what happens politically when a drone invariably falls out of the sky or "drifts off course" with both sides pointing fingers at one another? Of most concern, how would these matters be addressed during a crisis, with no precedents, in the context of a regional military regime in which actors have powerful incentives to strike first? These are not just theoretical questions: Japan's Defense Ministry is reportedly looking into options for shooting down any unmanned drones that enter its territorial airspace. Resolving these issues in a fraught strategic environment between two potential adversaries is difficult enough; the United States and China remain at loggerheads about U.S. Sensitive Reconnaissance Operations along China's periphery. But the problem is multiplying rapidly. The Chinese are running one of the most significant UAV programs in the world, a program that includes Reaper- style UAVs and Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicles (UCAVs); Japan is seeking to acquire Global Hawks; the Republic of Korea is acquiring Global Hawks while also building their own indigenous UAV capabilities; Taiwan is choosing to develop indigenous UAVs instead of importing from abroad; Indonesia is seeking to build a UAV squadron; and Vietnam is planning to build an entire UAV factory. One could take solace in Asia's ability to manage these gnarly sources of insecurity if the region had demonstrated similar competencies elsewhere. But nothing could be further from the case. It has now been more than a decade since the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and China signed a declaration "to promote a peaceful, friendly and harmonious environment in the South China Sea," which was meant to be a precursor to a code of conduct for managing potential incidents, accidents, and crises at sea. But the parties are as far apart as ever, and that's on well-trodden issues of maritime security with decades of legal and operational precedent to build upon. It's hard to be optimistic that the region will do better in an unmanned domain in which governments and militaries have little experience and where there remains a dearth of international norms, rules, and institutions from which to draw. The rapid diffusion of advanced military technology is not a future trend. These capabilities are being fielded -- right now -- in perhaps the most geopolitically dangerous area in the world, over (and soon under) the contested seas of East and Southeast Asia. These risks will only increase with time as more disruptive capabilities emerge. In the absence of political leadership, these technologies could very well lead the region into war.
While today’s discourse is dominated by the heightened and hyperbolic focus on the U.S.-China trade war, the very real threat of an unintended military incident in the East China Sea remains acute. Sustained economic tensions between the two countries may portend unanticipated consequences vis-à-vis the delicate security balance in this contested region. Underpinning this narrative is a concerted effort by China to “normalize” increased military activity — namely aerial and maritime incursions — into the disputed area of the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands (claimed by both China and Japan). As China makes rapid advances in developing, exporting, and fielding unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), what are the implications for increased UAV activity in the East China Sea? In 2013, Chinese UAV flights over the disputed islands exacerbated tensions between Beijing and Tokyo, prompting calls by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to “shoot down” the UAVs in question. In fact, overall Chinese incursions into Japanese airspace nearly doubled in order of magnitude between 2012-2015. While those numbers have fallen over the past year, it is quite conceivable that Beijing could return to previous activity levels in short order. China is following a strategy of normalizing its military activity in the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands as a means to desensitize Japan and the U.S. to the increased presence. It is a gamble that greatly mirrors Turkish military activity in the disputed aerial and maritime zones in the Aegean Sea. In this case, Turkey and Greece both have territorial claims to several rocky islets (not unlike the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands) that are the source of heightened military tensions. In 2015, Turkish aircraft violated Greek airspace nearly 1,500 times as part of this “normalization” strategy. Here, the United States was able to steer Turkey and Greece — both NATO members — away from open military conflict. However, in the case of the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands, Washington has clearly taken Tokyo’s side. The United States will not likely be able to dial back tensions as decisively as in the Turkish/Greek scenario if an unintended aerial mishap or shootdown occurs between Chinese and Japanese forces. Conventional wisdom suggests that an increase of UAV activity in the East China Sea may not pose as serious a threat as combat air patrols by armed fighter aircraft. But the employment of unmanned aerial vehicles — which are becoming increasingly weaponized — within disputed zones such as the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands complicates political and military efforts to enforce “norms” of aerial sovereignty. Unlike traditional aircraft, UAVs are vastly more difficult to detect. The consequences of destroying enemy UAVs are also subject to different legal interpretations. In contemporary practice, it is difficult for a government to respond with potentially disproportionate military or political action based on the loss of an “unmanned” asset. This reality emboldens armed forces to take offensive action, rather than avoiding escalation, as is generally the case when human lives are at stake. Returning to the previous example, tensions in the Aegean Sea may shed light on how events could develop in the East China Sea. Interestingly, the loss of both Greek and Turkish fighter aircraft and pilots due to “dogfights” in the Aegean has not brought the two countries closer to conflict. While tensions initially increased, the loss of human life has compelled negotiation and bargaining. The removal of this element via unmanned systems may in fact have the opposite effect. As China and other regional actors develop and acquire UAVs — but also improve command, control, communications, and intelligence networks — enforcing traditional norms of aerial sovereignty will become increasingly difficult. China’s declared intent to enforce its self-proclaimed air defense identification zone (ADIZ) encompassing the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands only raises the probability of heightened UAV activity in the region. A recent report by the Project 2049 Institute warns, rather ominously, of a “short, sharp war initiated by China” over the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands. Lending credence to the complexity that UAVs introduce to the disputed zone, the report also states: “given the dramatic increase in provocative PLA air force activity and Japanese responses to them in the East China Sea . . . the likelihood for an explosive incident has risen greatly. This is especially true since Tokyo and Beijing do not have a ‘hotline’ communication network that can be used by their militaries to avoid accidental aerial or maritime clashes.” Unresolved legal issues regarding attribution and proportionality will greatly determine the operational application of UAVs over the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands. The continuing development of UAV technology, in particular sensor improvements, weapon capabilities, and extended flight ranges will have sweeping effects on military operations. Diffusion of this technology and its proliferation and normalization will contribute to the challenging of aerial sovereignty in the disputed Diaoyu/Senkaku Island region. To be sure, China continues to make rapid advances in developing, producing, exporting, and operating UAVs, as well as the associated command, control, communications, and intelligence networks necessary to employ these systems in a broader offensive capacity. The future weaponization of these systems by regional actors and their employment in disputed areas like the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands has significant implications: 1) they raise the probability of an unintended incident or escalation of military hostilities among regional actors; 2) they erode the ability of regional actors to detect, enforce, and maintain the aerial integrity of both legitimate and disputed airspace; 3) the lack of a human pilot may embolden military forces to take offensive actions against drone activity that would otherwise be dismissed. The current trade war will continue to dominate headlines into the near future, but policymakers in Washington and throughout the Indo-Asia Pacific region cannot dismiss the East China Sea tensions that simmer just below the surface.
On September 9th, the Japanese Air Self-Defence Force scrambled an F-15 fighter jet in response to an aircraft that had intruded into Japanese airspace . The offending vehicle: a Chinese military drone. The surveillance drone was spotted flying over the Senkaku Islands-known in China as the Diaoyu Islands-in the southern region of the East China Sea. The Japanese government were furious; China was unapologetic. “China enjoys freedom of overflight in relevant waters… The Chinese military will organize similar routine activities in the future,” read a brief statement from the Ministry’s Information Bureau. Japan, China and Taiwan, drawn by the presence of undersea oil and gas resources, all claim the Senkaku Islands as their own. In the escalating dispute, drones are lowering the boiling point. Japan was shaken by the Chinese drone. “It was unexpected… I fear we are in the position of being one step behind,” an unnamed official from the Ministry of Defense told the Asahi Shimbun. After the overflight, the Ministry sprung into action. On October 20, Japan released new rules of engagement for drones that included the proviso that it would shoot down any unauthorized unmanned aircraft that entered Japanese airspace and ignored warnings to leave. These guidelines are more aggressive than those for manned aircraft, which stipulate that an intruder must pose a threat to Japanese nationals before qualifying as a target. In response to the new rules, Geng Yansheng, the spokesperson for the Chinese Ministry of Defense, announced that if Japan shoots down a Chinese drone over the Senkaku Islands, it will be “an act of war” that would prompt severe retaliation. For China, shooting down a drone seems as egregious as downing a manned jet while Japan appears more willing to take action against intrusive drones than against manned aircraft. In this case, the use of unmanned vehicles altered traditional rules of engagement, adding greater uncertainty and suspicion to what is already a powder keg of nationalistic sentiment. Sovereignty over the Senkaku Islands has been a complicated subject ever since Japan’s Meiji government seized the territories after defeating China in the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895. In 1900, Koga Tatsuhiro, a Japanese entrepreneur, started a fishing business on one of the islands. After the venture failed in 1940, the islands became deserted and the property was sold to the Kurihara family in 1970. In the Treaty of San Francisco after the Second World War, the United States took control of the Senkaku Islands as part of the Ryukyu Island chain that stretches from Okinawa to the Senkakus. A United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East survey in 1968 revealed potentially enormous deposits of undersea oil and gas around the islands. When the United States transferred Okinawa and the Ryukyu Islands back to Japan in 1972, the Senkaku Islands were included despite China making a claim on the territory in 1971. The issue was dormant until 2006, when the Japanese Coast Guard intercepted a group of Chinese and Taiwanese protesters who were attempting to land on the islands. In September 2012, the Japanese government agreed to buy the Senkaku islands from the Kurihara family, effectively nationalizing the territories and setting off protests in China. Controversial encounters between the Chinese and Japanese private and state actors have marred diplomatic relations and added an ominous warlike tone to the geopolitical rhetoric in the region. The Senkaku Islands are part of a larger swath of ocean territories claimed by China. The dispute with Japan in the East China Sea mirrors a similarly heated conflict between China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia and others over a host of small islands in the South China Sea. Uncompromising Chinese tactics in the South China Sea have led to a sympathetic deepening of ties between Japan and the Philippines and Vietnam. In June, the United States held training exercises with their Filipino counterparts on how to use unmanned surveillance aircraft. China is seen as pursuing an aggressive push for control of vital shipping lanes and undersea resources. Rising nationalism in Japan – and across the region generally – has fueled a popular resistance to what is perceived to be Chinese militarism. While China’s expansive strategy may be primarily commercially motivated, its conflicts with neighbors in the South and East China Seas are becoming more and more hawkish. Walter Russell Mead at Via Meadia blog has argued that the South China Sea is a flashpoint in the new “Great Game” in Asia among developing nations. At the Naval Diplomat blog, James R. Holmes suggests that China could apply a Fabian strategy, so named after the Roman general Quintus Fabius who used delaying tactics and attrition to wear down Hannibal’s Carthaginian army. In London’s Financial Times, Graham Allison, a professor at Harvard’s Kennedy School, worried that the island disputes might force China and the U.S. into “the Thucydides trap,” referring to the theory that the ancient Greek city-states of Athens and Sparta were led into war by Athens’ precipitous rise to military and economic power. None of these scenarios, however valid they might be in other respects, consider the role that drones might play in escalating the tensions. Drones already do not have the best track record when it comes to safeguarding national sovereignty. Their part in the Senkaku Islands dispute, while so far relatively minor in comparison to role of civilian protesters and naval forces, adds a new dimension to this old conflict. There are two major drone-related developments that could have an impact on the delicate situation in the East China Sea: Chinese investment in drones and Japan’s more aggressive military posture. China has been investing heavily in unmanned technology, producing and exporting their own line of drones since 2005. In June, Beijing announced that five nations are interested in buying the Wing Loon UAV, a drone similar to the American Predator and that was likely what flew over the Senkaku Islands in September. Other Chinese drone models such as this prototype of a high-altitude surveillance aircraft similar to Northrop Grumman’s Global Hawk and a stealth fighter drone reflect Beijing’s interest in developing a broad spectrum of unmanned aircraft. Last week, Beijing announced that it was building a new industrial base that will produce drones on massive scale. China’s desire for drone technology became front page news when it was revealed in September, 2013 that a People’s Liberation Army unit of computer hackers were targeting American defense contractors that manufacture drones. A 2012 report by the American Department of Defense Science Board warned that “China might easily match or outpace U.S. spending on unmanned systems, rapidly close the technology gaps and become a formidable global competitor in unmanned systems.” This emphasis on drones is happening against the backdrop of the sharp rise of China’s arms industry. In October, the New York Times reported that Chinese arms manufacturers are aggressively pursuing export contracts with nations worldwide and developing complex military hardware such as fighter jets and missile defense systems. The rise of regional tensions and the popularity of a conservative government in Tokyo is signalling a shift in Japan’s strategic posture. Japan’s post-Second World War constitution dictates that their Self-Defence Forces may only be used in combat when the nation is under direct attack. Members of the SDF are technically civilians and the Ministry of Defense is restricted from purchasing what may be considered offensive weapons. Shinzo Abe, the current Prime Minister and a right-wing nationalist, has made it clear that he intends to move away from the pacifist constitution; “We must act now in order to protect peace into the future,” Abe told the Japanese parliament in October. The territorial disputes, combined with the ever-present threat from North Korea, offer Prime Minister Abe a fresh opportunity to push through major changes in the role of the Self-Defence Forces. The Self-Defence Forces are already evolving. A paper published by the Ministry of Defence in July stated that Japan should acquire drones and form a new infantry force based on the American Marine Corps that will be equipped with amphibious assault vehicles and tasked with taking back islands in case of an attack. Earlier this week, Japan installed missiles on Miyako Island (part of the Ryukyu Island chain) and Self-Defence forces will soon begin war games that are, in the words of an SDF spokesperson, “designed for the defence of islands.” Japan’s ability to monitor the islands was expanded by a newly-revised defence alliance with the United States, in which it was agreed that American Global Hawk surveillance drones will be deployed to Japan to replace the ageing U-2 aircraft. The deployment gives Japanese Air Self-Defence Forces the opportunity to become familiar with the aircraft before they acquire their own Global Hawk drones in 2015. The political and military investments by both China and Japan suggest that the strategic picture in the East China Sea is rapidly changing. With their emphasis on drones, the Chinese are making great strides in upgrading their military hardware in ways that will allow them to project their influence and strike capabilities over an expanding area. Drones offer the possibility of monitoring far-away and tense territorial disputes without risking the lives of military personnel. Likewise, with the American Global Hawks, Japan is able to conduct high-altitude surveillance flights over their long chain of islands and prepare for the arrival of their own drones. The upcoming military exercises near the Miyako Islands and the formation of a new amphibian infantry force are clearly a reaction to perceived Chinese threats against their islands. Altering the Constitution would signify a major change in the regional strategic picture that could influence American military deployments in Asia as well as negatively impact Japan’s relations with their South Korean neighbor, where the memory of Japan’s brutal occupation persists. The proliferation of unmanned surveillance aircraft and an agreement similar to President Eisenhower’s 1955 “Open Skies” proposal could help deter conflict by giving each side better knowledge of movements by the other. However, these measures would do little to calm the flaring nationalistic feeling in both countries or solve the question of ownership of undersea resources. The region is seeing a significant escalation in military preparedness in reaction to the tensions over the Senkaku Islands. The investments in drones by both sides could result in one of these aircraft acting as a catalyst for broader conventional military action. This possibility was made clear by China’s reaction to Japan’s revised rules of engagement concerning intrusive drones. The Senkaku Islands dispute is becoming the first case study of the role that drones play in escalating geopolitical tensions.
China’s seizure of a US navy submarine drone signals its willingness to push back harder against American surveillance in the South China Sea, as tensions mount between the two nations ahead of the presidential inauguration of Donald Trump. The Pentagon said China had agreed to return the surveillance device, which was seized in international waters on Thursday. But the incident highlights concern about the direction of US-China ties amid uncertainty about the stance Mr Trump will adopt. Mr Trump has been critical about China since launching his campaign, on everything from trade policy to its assertive moves in the South China Sea. After his victory, however, he sparked alarm in Beijing and among many experts in Washington by speaking to the Taiwanese president and hinting that he might abandon the “One China” policy that has guided US policy on China and Taiwan for four decades. The president-elect cricised China over the drone incident, which he said was “unprecedented" before saying that the US should allow China to keep the device. “We should tell China that we don’t want the drone they stole back — let them keep it!” he tweeted. While US-Sino relations usually enter a period of uncertainly at a time of administration change in Washington, analysts said that the apprehension surrounding the drone in disputed waters bucks the recent trend of improving ties between the US and Chinese navies. US voters appear to have opened the gates to a new cold war, writes Edward Luce “This goes against the grain of the professionalisation of [China’s] People’s Liberation Army Navy over the past few years, as it seemed to be embracing confidence-building measures with the US,” said Euan Graham, a security analyst at the Lowy Institute, a think-tank in Sydney. “This is a significant escalation with a navy ship interfering with another navy ship at close quarters.” Ni Lexiong, a naval expert at the East China University, said the seizure was “a reminder to surrounding countries in the South China Sea area, as well as the US and Japan, to reconsider China’s stance on defending its territory”. The Pentagon said the drone, which was being operated by the USNS Bowditch, a civilian-operated navy survey vessel, was taken “unlawfully” by a Chinese naval ship on Thursday, 50 nautical miles from Subic Bay in the Philippines. Such drones are typically used to collect oceanographic data such as water depth and salinity. China’s defence ministry said that it had seized the drone “to prevent it endangering the navigation and crew” of the Chinese ship. But it also reiterated its opposition to US military reconnaissance operations in the waters around China. Analysts said that while the information gleaned from underwater drones was not classified, it was vital to the operation of the submarines that both sides operate in the South China Sea. Li Mingjiang, a China expert at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore, said Beijing was willing to risk an escalation with Washington over the latest incident because it was worried about US plans to expand the use of naval drones in the South China Sea. “PLA leaders have good reason to worry about this emerging US naval strategy against China in East Asia,” he said. “If this strategy becomes reality, it could be quite detrimental to China’s national security.” Yue Gang, a retired PLA colonel, said that while the Bowditch might have been in international waters, it was “almost certain that the drone was conducting espionage activities” within the nine-dashed line, Beijing’s contested claim to much of the South China Sea. He said that Beijing’s response was a “significant signal” of its displeasure with US policy, while also giving the navy time to analyse the drone to obtain “evidence of the espionage activities”. Western analysts said that such a brazen act would undermine other nations’ confidence in China’s commitment to global norms. “It’s illegal and it fuels concerns about whether China is really willing to abide by the international right of freedom of navigation,” said Ian Storey, a senior fellow at the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore. Security analysts also said that the seizure would prompt the US and others to rethink how they deploy civilian survey vessels and underwater drones. “There will have to be a reappraisal of how unarmed US vessels do business in the South China Sea,” said Mr Graham of the Lowy Institute. “They’re going to require an escort or armed personnel on board.” Heiko Borchert, a security consultant, said that China’s actions highlight the risks of deploying drones in a “non-benign naval environment”. “The incident shows that the tactical and strategic benefits of unmanned underwater vehicles can quickly turn into a strategic liability if other actors are not willing to back down on their own policy line,” he wrote on the website of the Center for International Maritime Security, a US think-tank.
Japan scrambled warplanes on Thursday after four Chinese coastguard ships and a drone aircraft entered territory it claims around disputed islands in the East China Sea, according to Defense Ministry officials. Tokyo said it was the first time Beijing has used an unmanned aircraft in the long-simmering dispute over the islands, called the Senkaku by Japan and the Diaoyu by China. Japanese Defense Minister Tomomi Inada said use of the drone aggravated tensions inflamed by what Japan says are a record number of scrambles by its Self-Defense Force aircraft in response to Chinese incursions in the last fiscal year. "China is escalating the situation unilaterally, and this is totally unacceptable," Inada said at a press conference. Japan responded with two F-15 fighter jets along with two early warning aircraft, according to the defense minister. The Senkaku/Diaoyu chain lies almost 1,900 kilometers (1,180 miles) southwest of the Japanese capital Tokyo. Although the islands are uninhabited, their ownership would allow for exclusive oil, mineral and fishing rights in the surrounding waters. Though claims to the island chain date back centuries, the most recent round of tensions began in 2012, when Japan nationalized the islands to ward off a planned sale to Tokyo's then-governor, a hardline nationalist apparently hoping to develop the islands. The plan sparked massive anti-Japanese protests across China, and Chinese Coastguard vessels and fishing boats began plying waters around the islands. In 2013, China declared a formal Air Defense Identification Zone covering airspace over the islands and overlapping with airspace claimed by Japan. The ADIZ declaration required airlines flying over the waters to first notify China. The move prompted an outcry from Japan and the United States, but a US report last year suggested that it was not being fully enforced. According to Tokyo's figures, however, China has not been shy in sending its ships and planes into areas claimed by Japan. For the fiscal year that ended March 31, Japan said it scrambled aircraft a total of 1,168 times, or on average, a little over three times per day. Chinese incursions were the reason for 73% of those missions, while Russian incursions accounted for 26%, Japan's Defense Ministry said in an April report.
The greatest threat to regional security (although curiously not at the top of most lists of U.S. regional concerns) is the possibility that increased India-Pakistan tension will erupt into all-out warthat could quickly escalate into a nuclear exchange. Indeed, in just the past two decades, the two neighbors have come perilously close to war on several occasions. India and Pakistan remain the most likely belligerents in the world to engage in nuclear war. Due to an Indian preponderance of conventional forces, Pakistan would have a strong incentive to use its nuclear arsenal very early on before a routing of its military installations and weaker conventional forces. In the event of conflict, Pakistan’s only chance of survival would be the early use of its nuclear arsenal to inflict unacceptable damage to Indian military and (much more likely) civilian targets. By raising the stakes to unacceptable levels, Pakistan would hope that India would step away from the brink. However, it is equally likely that India would respond in kind, with escalation ensuing. Neither state possesses tactical nuclear weapons, but both possess scores of city-sized bombs like those used on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Furthermore, as more damage was inflicted (or as the result of a decapitating strike), command and control elements would be disabled, leaving individual commanders to respondin an environment increasingly clouded by the fog of war and decreasing the likelihood that either government (what would be left of them) would be able to guarantee that their forces would follow a negotiated settlement or phased reduction in hostilities. As a result any suchconflict would likely continue to escalateuntil one side incurred an unacceptable or wholly debilitating level of injury or exhausted its nuclear arsenal. A nuclear conflict in the subcontinentwould havedisastrous effects on the world as a whole. In a January 2010 paper published in Scientific American, climatology professors Alan Robock and Owen Brian Toon forecast the global repercussionsof a regional nuclear war. Their results are strikingly similar to those of studies conducted in 1980 that conclude that a nuclear war between the United States and the Soviet Union wouldresult in acatastrophic and prolonged nuclear winter,which could very well place the survival of the human race in jeopardy. In their study, Robock and Toon use computer models to simulate the effect of a nuclear exchange between India and Pakistan in which each were to use roughly half their existing arsenals (50 apiece). Since Indian and Pakistani nuclear devices are strategic rather than tactical, the likely targets would be major population centers. Owing to the population densities of urban centers in both nations, the number of direct casualties could climb as high as 20 million. The fallout of such an exchange would not merely be limited to the immediate area. First, the detonation of a large number of nuclear devices would propel as much as seven million metric tons of ash, soot, smoke, and debris as high as the lower stratosphere. Owing to their small size (less than a tenth of a micron) and a lack of precipitation at this altitude, ash particles would remain aloft for as long as a decade, during which time the world would remain perpetually overcast. Furthermore, these particles would soak up heat from the sun, generating intense heat in the upper atmosphere that would severely damage the earth’s ozone layer. The inability of sunlight to penetrate through the smoke and dust would lead toglobal cooling by as much as 2.3 degrees Fahrenheit. This shift in global temperature would lead to more drought, worldwide food shortages, and widespread political upheaval. Although the likelihood of this doomsday scenario remains relatively low, the consequences are dire enough to warrant greater U.S. and international attention. Furthermore, due to the ongoing conflict over Kashmir and the deep animus held between India and Pakistan, it might not take much to set them off. Indeed, following the successful U.S. raid on bin Laden’s compound, several members of India’s security apparatus along with conservative politicians have argued that India should emulate the SEAL Team Six raid and launch their own cross-border incursions to nab or kill anti-Indian terrorists, either preemptively or after the fact. Such provocative action could very well lead to all-out war between the two that couldquickly escalate.
Over the past 8 days, North Korea successfully tested two nuclear-capable missiles, making a mockery of President Trump’s tough approach on North Korea. He has meanwhile opened his arms of friendship to Russia and China, the biggest global threats to democracy. His public excuse is the need to work with Russia on terrorism, and with China on North Korea. That help has not materialized, which will be a test of Trump’s mettle. If he fails to take action against North Korea, and leaves his many concessions to China in place, he got played. The North Korean launches are the latest in decades of events that show an animosity of authoritarian rulers toward democracies. Shortly after the Soviet Union disintegrated in the 1990s, many U.S. analysts saw democracy and liberalism as triumphant over autocracy, and even presaged the “end of history.” Russia and China were proceeding toward market liberalization and democratization. The democratic peace would soon take hold and the world would evolve in a utopic manner, they thought. But that dream now seems far-flung, with low-grade Russian and Chinese offensives in Eastern Europe and Asia respectively. These offensives are calibrated in such a manner as to make territorial gains, while not provoking a military response. They utilize alliances with Iran and North Korea to encourage rogue state action that distracts global public attention from Chinese and Russian territorial offenses. Conversely, the United States, Japan, South Korea, Australia, the European Union and others are in a relatively loose alliance based on the common values of democracy, human rights, and freedom of speech. But the alliance is divided by the strong democratic desire for peace, and domestic elites with individual incentives to value trade and investment over the defense of values like democracy. It is subject to free riding, which President Trump has successfully pushed, including at an upcoming meeting in Brussels on May 25. What could be called an autocratic bloc is provoking, through territorial expansion and destabilizing nuclear development, an interrelated set of conflicts developing in the direction of a New Cold War between autocracies on one side, and democracies on the other. As with the old Cold War, the locus of the conflict is everywhere, including the South China Sea, East China Sea, North Korean and Iranian nuclear and ballistic missile development, the Russian occupation of Crimea in Ukraine, Russia’s attempt to reclaim influence in the former Soviet Union, including through occupation of part of Georgia, China’s attempt to push the U.S. out of Asia and claim it as a sphere of influence, the Arctic, space, undersea exploration, and Russian and Chinese attempts to influence politicians and even voting outcomes in democratic countries. To institutionalize its growing power and leadership of autocratic countries, and many democratic hangers-on, China attempts to reform global governance not through democratization that might help countries like Japan, India, Brazil and Germany to positions of greater influence in places like the U.N. Security Council, but to uniquely reflect and accommodate China’s own growing economic and military power. Democracies are being challenged worldwide by this autocratic bloc. If democracies do not have a clear-eyed understanding of the threat, and a grand strategy to defeat or at least deflect the challenge, democracies will be weakened in such a way as to make future challenges even more difficult to overcome. The outcomes of the challenges that democracies face today will determine future outcomes, in a process that is increasingly path dependent. Nowhere are the challenges and path dependence greater than in defending democratic voting processes from autocratic influence, and in defending front-line democratic territory in places like Eastern Europe, the East China Sea, the South China Sea, the Himalayas, and Taiwan. Decisions on defensive actions or inactions by allied democracies on these fields of economic, diplomatic, and military battle will profoundly affect the future of democracy, peace, and stability for decades, if not centuries, to come. Positive outcomes will require not just grand strategies by major powers, but comprehensive citizen involvement by people of many nations who care about a future that is democratic and at peace.
Although a comprehensive US drone policy has yet to be developed, President Trump’s approach to drone export and use is coming into focus. In short, the Trump administration seems intent on undoing many of the policies, procedures, and restraints put in place by the Obama administration. Current US drone policy rests on policies established during the Obama administration, perhaps most notably a 2013 Presidential Policy Guidance (PPG) 1 that: • Outlines parameters of drone use in counterterrorism operations; • Establishes a standard of “near certainty” that no civilians will be injured or killed in counterterrorism strikes; and • Establishes a standard that targets of drone strikes must pose a “continuing and imminent threat.” From a use standpoint, the Trump administration has increased the use of armed drones, averaging one drone strike every 1.5 days versus every 5.4 days during the Obama administration, according to data compiled by the Council on Foreign Relations. 2 These strikes have occurred in a growing number of theaters. The Trump administration has also demonstrated a willingness to increase the number of places in which drones can be used with relatively fewer restraints. Previously, these areas only included Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, but may now include certain provinces in Yemen and Somalia as well. Reports also indicate that the Trump administration has reestablished Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) authority to conduct lethal strikes, perhaps reflecting an inclination toward a more hands-on CIA role in Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and other areas where counter terrorism operations are priorities. 3 In addition, the Trump administration seems to be on track to rescind or relax certain standards for drone strikes as detailed in the 2013 PPG including the necessity for targets to pose a “continuing and imminent threat” and for there to be “near certainty” that no civilians be injured or killed in a given strike. Such relaxation could put civilians at heightened risk should the threshold for conducting lethal strikes be lowered. Less than a year into the Trump administration, we are seeing an acceptance of greater civilian casualties – and risk to civilians – and a lower threshold for lethal strikes. As a result, the United States could see greater opposition to its drone programme by partners and allies, as well as countries targeted by American strikes. The Trump administration does seem to be committed to the Obama-era effort of developing global norms and standards however. The October 2016 launch of the Joint Declaration for the export and subsequent use of armed or strike-enabled unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) established a process for the future development of these global norms.4 The Trump administration decided in June 2016 that the United States would remain a co-leader of this process and engaged in its development. The Trump administration’s current actions on US drone policy, however, could undermine its leadership on multilateral efforts to develop international standards to guide drone transfer and use. Governments will question American motivations if US actions are in direct contravention of the proposed global framework that it is pushing simultaneously.
¶ Assessing the Security Benefits of Deep Engagement¶ Even if deep engagement's costs are far less than retrenchment advocates claim, they are not worth bearing unless they yield greater benefits. We focus here on the strategy's major security benefits; in the next section, we take up the wider payoffs of the United States' security role for its interests in other realms, notably the global economy—an interaction relatively unexplored by international relations scholars.¶ A core premise of deep engagement is that it prevents the emergence of a far [End Page 33] more dangerous global security environment. For one thing, as noted above, the United States' overseas presence gives it the leverage to restrain partners from taking provocative action. Perhaps more important, its core alliance commitments also deter states with aspirations to regional hegemony from contemplating expansion and make its partners more secure, reducing their incentive to adopt solutions to their security problems that threaten others and thus stoke security dilemmas. The contention that engaged U.S. power dampens the baleful effects of anarchy is consistent with influential variants of realist theory. Indeed, arguably the scariest portrayal of the war-prone world that would emerge absent the "American Pacifier" is provided in the works of John Mearsheimer, who forecasts dangerous multipolar regions replete with security competition, arms races, nuclear proliferation and associated preventive war temptations, regional rivalries, and even runs at regional hegemony and full-scale great power war.72¶ How do retrenchment advocates, the bulk of whom are realists, discount this benefit? Their arguments are complicated, but two capture most of the variation: (1) U.S. security guarantees are not necessary to prevent dangerous rivalries and conflict in Eurasia; or (2) prevention of rivalry and conflict in Eurasia is not a U.S. interest. Each response is connected to a different theory or set of theories, which makes sense given that the whole debate hinges on a complex future counterfactual (what would happen to Eurasia's security setting if the United States truly disengaged?). Although a certain answer is impossible, each of these responses is nonetheless a weaker argument for retrenchment than advocates acknowledge.¶ The first response flows from defensive realism as well as other international relations theories that discount the conflict-generating potential of anarchy under contemporary conditions.73 Defensive realists maintain that the high expected [End Page 34] costs of territorial conquest, defense dominance, and an array of policies and practices that can be used credibly to signal benign intent, mean that Eurasia's major states could manage regional multipolarity peacefully without the American pacifier.¶ Retrenchment would be a bet on this scholarship, particularly in regions where the kinds of stabilizers that nonrealist theories point to—such as democratic governance or dense institutional linkages—are either absent or weakly present. There are three other major bodies of scholarship, however, that might give decisionmakers pause before making this bet. First is regional expertise. Needless to say, there is no consensus on the net security effects of U.S. withdrawal. Regarding each region, there are optimists and pessimists. Few experts expect a return of intense great power competition in a post-American Europe, but many doubt European governments will pay the political costs of increased EU defense cooperation and the budgetary costs of increasing military outlays.74 The result might be a Europe that is incapable of securing itself from various threats that could be destabilizing within the region and beyond (e.g., a regional conflict akin to the 1990s Balkan wars), lacks capacity for global security missions in which U.S. leaders might want European participation, and is vulnerable to the influence of outside rising powers.¶ What about the other parts of Eurasia where the United States has a substantial military presence? Regarding the Middle East, the balance begins to swing toward pessimists concerned that states currently backed by Washington—notably Israel, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia—might take actions upon U.S. retrenchment that would intensify security dilemmas. And concerning East Asia, pessimism regarding the region's prospects without the American pacifier is pronounced. Arguably the principal concern expressed by area experts is that Japan and South Korea are likely to obtain a nuclear capacity and increase their military commitments, which could stoke a destabilizing reaction from China. It is notable that during the Cold War, both South Korea and [End Page 35] Taiwan moved to obtain a nuclear weapons capacity and were only constrained from doing so by a still-engaged United States.75¶ The second body of scholarship casting doubt on the bet on defensive realism's sanguine portrayal is all of the research that undermines its conception of state preferences. Defensive realism's optimism about what would happen if the United States retrenched is very much dependent on its particular—and highly restrictive—assumption about state preferences; once we relax this assumption, then much of its basis for optimism vanishes. Specifically, the prediction of post-American tranquility throughout Eurasia rests on the assumption that security is the only relevant state preference, with security defined narrowly in terms of protection from violent external attacks on the homeland. Under that assumption, the security problem is largely solved as soon as offense and defense are clearly distinguishable, and offense is extremely expensive relative to defense. Burgeoning research across the social and other sciences, however, undermines that core assumption: states have preferences not only for security but also for prestige, status, and other aims, and they engage in trade-offs among the various objectives.76 In addition, they define security not just in terms of territorial protection but in view of many and varied milieu goals. It follows that even states that are relatively secure may nevertheless engage in highly competitive behavior. Empirical studies show that this is indeed sometimes the case.77 In sum, a bet on a benign postretrenchment Eurasia is a bet that leaders of major countries will never allow these nonsecurity preferences to influence their strategic choices.¶ To the degree that these bodies of scholarly knowledge have predictive leverage, U.S. retrenchment would result in a significant deterioration in the security environment in at least some of the world's key regions. We have already [End Page 36] mentioned the third, even more alarming body of scholarship. Offensive realism predicts that the withdrawal of the American pacifier will yield either a competitive regional multipolarity complete with associated insecurity, arms racing, crisis instability, nuclear proliferation, and the like, or bids for regional hegemony, which may be beyond the capacity of local great powers to contain (and which in any case would generate intensely competitive behavior, possibly including regional great power war).¶ Hence it is unsurprising that retrenchment advocates are prone to focus on the second argument noted above: that avoiding wars and security dilemmas in the world's core regions is not a U.S. national interest. Few doubt that the United States could survive the return of insecurity and conflict among Eurasian powers, but at what cost? Much of the work in this area has focused on the economic externalities of a renewed threat of insecurity and war, which we discuss below. Focusing on the pure security ramifications, there are two main reasons why decisionmakers may be rationally reluctant to run the retrenchment experiment. First, overall higher levels of conflict make the world a more dangerous place. Were Eurasia to return to higher levels of interstate military competition, one would see overall higher levels of military spending and innovation and a higher likelihood of competitive regional proxy wars and arming of client states—all of which would be concerning, in part because it would promote a faster diffusion of military power away from the United States.¶ Greater regional insecurity could well feed proliferation cascades, as states such as Egypt, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and Saudi Arabia all might choose to create nuclear forces.78 It is unlikely that proliferation decisions by any of these actors would be the end of the game: they would likely generate pressure locally for more proliferation. Following Kenneth Waltz, many retrenchment advocates are proliferation optimists, assuming that nuclear deterrence solves the security problem.79 Usually carried out in dyadic terms, the debate [End Page 37] over the stability of proliferation changes as the numbers go up. Proliferation optimism rests on assumptions of rationality and narrow security preferences. In social science, however, such assumptions are inevitably probabilistic. Optimists assume that most states are led by rational leaders, most will overcome organizational problems and resist the temptation to preempt before feared neighbors nuclearize, and most pursue only security and are risk averse. Confidence in such probabilistic assumptions declines if the world were to move from nine to twenty, thirty, or forty nuclear states. In addition, many of the other dangers noted by analysts who are concerned about the destabilizing effects of nuclear proliferation—including the risk of accidents and the prospects that some new nuclear powers will not have truly survivable forces—seem prone to go up as the number of nuclear powers grows.80 Moreover, the risk of "unforeseen crisis dynamics" that could spin out of control is also higher as the number of nuclear powers increases. Finally, add to these concerns the enhanced danger of nuclear leakage, and a world with overall higher levels of security competition becomes yet more worrisome.¶ The argument that maintaining Eurasian peace is not a U.S. interest faces a second problem. On widely accepted realist assumptions, acknowledging that U.S. engagement preserves peace dramatically narrows the difference between retrenchment and deep engagement. For many supporters of retrenchment, the optimal strategy for a power such as the United States, which has attained regional hegemony and is separated from other great powers by oceans, is offshore balancing: stay over the horizon and "pass the buck" to local powers to do the dangerous work of counterbalancing any local rising power. The United States should commit to onshore balancing only when local balancing is likely to fail and a great power appears to be a credible contender for regional hegemony, as in the cases of Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union in the mid-twentieth century.¶ The problem is that China's rise puts the possibility of its attaining regional hegemony on the table, at least in the medium to long term. As Mearsheimer notes, "The United States will have to play a key role in countering China, because its Asian neighbors are not strong enough to do it by themselves."81 [End Page 38] Therefore, unless China's rise stalls, "the United States is likely to act toward China similar to the way it behaved toward the Soviet Union during the Cold War."82 It follows that the United States should take no action that would compromise its capacity to move to onshore balancing in the future. It will need to maintain key alliance relationships in Asia as well as the formidably expensive military capacity to intervene there. The implication is to get out of Iraq and Afghanistan, reduce the presence in Europe, and pivot to Asia—just what the United States is doing.83¶ In sum, the argument that U.S. security commitments are unnecessary for peace is countered by a lot of scholarship, including highly influential realist scholarship. In addition, the argument that Eurasian peace is unnecessary for U.S. security is weakened by the potential for a large number of nasty security consequences as well as the need to retain a latent onshore balancing capacity that dramatically reduces the savings retrenchment might bring. Moreover, switching between offshore and onshore balancing could well be difficult.¶ Bringing together the thrust of many of the arguments discussed so far underlines the degree to which the case for retrenchment misses the underlying logic of the deep engagement strategy. By supplying reassurance, deterrence, and active management, the United States lowers security competition in the world's key regions, thereby preventing the emergence of a hothouse atmosphere for growing new military capabilities. Alliance ties dissuade partners from ramping up and also provide leverage to prevent military transfers to potential rivals. On top of all this, the United States' formidable military machine may deter entry by potential rivals. Current great power military expenditures as a percentage of GDP are at historical lows, and thus far other major powers have shied away from seeking to match top-end U.S. military capabilities. In addition, they have so far been careful to avoid attracting the "focused enmity" [End Page 39] of the United States.84 All of the world's most modern militaries are U.S. allies (America's alliance system of more than sixty countries now accounts for some 80 percent of global military spending), and the gap between the U.S. military capability and that of potential rivals is by many measures growing rather than shrinking.85¶ In the end, therefore, deep engagement reduces security competition and does so in a way that slows the diffusion of power away from the United States. This in turn makes it easier to sustain the policy over the long term.¶ The Wider Benefits of Deep Engagement¶ The case against deep engagement overstates its costs and underestimates its security benefits. Perhaps its most important weakness, however, is that its preoccupation with security issues diverts attention from some of deep engagement's most important benefits: sustaining the global economy and fostering institutionalized cooperation in ways advantageous to U.S. national interests.¶ Economic Benefits¶ Deep engagement is based on a premise central to realist scholarship from E.H. Carr to Robert Gilpin: economic orders do not just emerge spontaneously; they are created and sustained by and for powerful states.86 To be sure, the sheer size of its economy would guarantee the United States a significant role in the politics of the global economy whatever grand strategy it adopted. Yet the fact that it is the leading military power and security provider also enables economic leadership. The security role figures in the creation, maintenance, and expansion of the system. In part because other states—including all but one of the world's largest economies—were heavily dependent on U.S. security protection during the Cold War, the United States was able not only to foster the economic order but also to prod other states to buy into it and to support plans for its progressive expansion.87 Today, as the discussion in the [End Page 40] previous section underscores, the security commitments of deep engagement support the global economic order by reducing the likelihood of security dilemmas, arms racing, instability, regional conflicts and, in extremis, major power war. In so doing, the strategy helps to maintain a stable and comparatively open world economy—a long-standing U.S. national interest.¶ In addition to ensuring the global economy against important sources of insecurity, the extensive set of U.S. military commitments and deployments helps to protect the "global economic commons." One key way is by helping to keep sea-lanes and other shipping corridors freely available for commerce.88 A second key way is by helping to establish and protect property/sovereignty rights in the oceans. Although it is not the only global actor relevant to protecting the global economic commons, the United States has by far the most important role given its massive naval superiority and the leadership role it plays in international economic institutions. If the United States were to pull back from the world, protecting the global economic commons would likely be much harder to accomplish for a number of reasons: cooperating with other nations on these matters would be less likely to occur; maintaining the relevant institutional foundations for promoting this goal would be harder; and preserving access to bases throughout the world—which is needed to accomplish this mission—would likely be curtailed to some degree.¶ Advocates of retrenchment agree that a flourishing global economy is an important U.S. interest, but they are largely silent on the role U.S. grand strategy plays in sustaining it.89 For their part, many scholars of international political [End Page 41] economy have long argued that economic openness might continue even in the absence of hegemonic leadership.90 Yet this does not address the real question of interest: Does hegemonic leadership make the continuation of global economic stability more likely? The voluminous literature contains no analysis that suggests a negative answer; what scholars instead note is that the likelihood of overcoming problems of collective action, relative gains, and incomplete information drops in the absence of leadership.91 It would thus take a bold if not reckless leader to run a grand experiment to determine whether the global economy can continue to expand in the absence of U.S. leadership.¶ Deep engagement not only helps to underwrite the global economy in a general sense, but it also allows the United States to structure it in ways that serve the United States' narrow economic interests. Carla Norrlof argues persuasively that America disproportionately benefits from the current structure of the global economy, and that its ability to reap these advantages is directly tied to its position of military preeminence within the system.92 One way this occurs is via "microlevel structuring"—that is, the United States gets better economic bargains or increased economic cooperation on some specific issues than it would if it did not play such a key security role. As Joseph Nye observes, [End Page 42] "Even if the direct use of force were banned among a group of countries, military force would still play an important political role. For example, the American military role in deterring threats to allies, or of assuring access to a crucial resource such as oil in the Persian Gulf, means that the provision of protective force can be used in bargaining situations. Sometimes the linkage may be direct; more often it is a factor not mentioned openly but present in the back of statesmen's minds."93 Although Nye is right that such linkage will generally be implicit, extensive analyses of declassified documents by historians shows that the United States directly used its overseas security commitments and military deployments to convince allies to change their economic policies to its benefit during the Cold War.94¶ The United States' security commitments continue to bolster the pursuit of its economic interests. Interviews with current and past U.S. administration officials reveal wide agreement that alliance ties help gain favorable outcomes on trade and other economic issues. To the question, "Does the alliance system pay dividends for America in nonsecurity areas, such as economic relations?," the typical answer in interviews is "an unequivocal yes."95 U.S. security commitments sometimes enhance bargaining leverage over the specific terms of economic agreements and give other governments more general incentives to enter into agreements that benefit the United States economically—two recent examples being the 2012 Korea-United States Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA) and the United States-Australia FTA (which entered into force in 2005).96 Officials across administrations of different parties stress that the desire of Korea and Australia to tighten their security relationships with the United States was a core reason why Washington was able to enter into free [End Page 43] trade agreements with them and to do so on terms favorable to U.S. economic interests. As one former official indicates, "The KORUS FTA—and I was involved in the initial planning—was attractive to Korea in large measure because it would help to underpin the US-ROK [South Korea] alliance at a time of shifting power in the region."97 Korean leaders' interest in maintaining a strong security relationship with the United States, another former official stressed, made them more willing to be flexible regarding the terms of the agreement because "failure would look like a setback to the political and security relationship. Once we got into negotiations with the ROK, look at how many times we reneged even after we signed a deal. . . . We asked for changes in labor and environment clauses, in auto clauses and the Koreans took it all."98¶ U.S. security leverage is economically beneficial in a second respect: it can facilitate "macrolevel structuring" of the global economy. Macrolevel structuring is crucial because so much of what the United States wants from the economic order is simply "more of the same"—it prefers the structure of the main international economic institutions such as the World Trade Organization and the International Monetary Fund; it prefers the existence of "open regionalism" 99; it prefers the dollar as the reserve currency; and so on. U.S. interests are thus well served to the extent that American allies favor the global economic status quo rather than revisions that could be harmful to U.S. economic interests. One reason they are often inclined to take this approach is because of their security relationship with the United States. For example, interviews with U.S. officials stress that alliance ties give Washington leverage and authority in the current struggle over multilateral governance institutions in Asia. As one official noted, "On the economic side, the existence of the security alliance contributes to an atmosphere of trust that enables the United States and Japan to present a united front on shared economic goals—such as open markets and transparency, for example, through APEC [Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation]."100 Likewise, Japan's current interest in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the Obama administration's most important long-term economic initiative in East Asia, is widely understood to be shaped less by specific Japanese [End Page 44] economic interests than by the belief of Yoshihiko Noda's administration that it will strengthen alliance ties with the United States.101 As one former administration official stressed, this enhanced allied interest in supporting U.S. favored economic frameworks as a means of strengthening security ties with the United States helps to ensure against any shift to "a Sino-centric/ nontransparent/more mercantilist economic order in Asia."102¶ The United States' security leverage over its allies matters even if it is not used actively to garner support for its conception of the global economy and other economic issues. This is perhaps best illustrated by the status of the dollar as the reserve currency, which confers major benefits on the United States.103 For many analysts, the U.S. position as the leading superpower with worldwide security commitments is an important reason why the dollar was established as the reserve currency and why it is likely to retain this status for a long time.104 In the past, Washington frequently used direct security leverage to get its allies to support the dollar.105 There are a number of subtler mechanisms, however, through which the current U.S. geopolitical position serves the same end. First, Kathleen McNamara builds on the logic of focal points to argue that the U.S. global military role bolsters the likelihood that the dollar will long continue to be the currency that actors converge upon as the "'natural' dominant currency."106 Second, Norrlof emphasizes the significance of a mechanism that U.S. officials also stress: the United States' geopolitical position gives it the ability to constrain certain forms of Asian regionalism that, if they were to eventuate, could help to promote movement away from the dollar. 107 Third, Adam Posen emphasizes that the EU's security dependence on the United States makes it less likely that the euro countries will develop a true [End Page 45] global military capacity and thus "that the dollar will continue to benefit from the geopolitical sources of its global role" in ways that the euro countries will never match.108¶ In sum, the United States is a key pillar of the global economy, but it does not provide this service for free: it also extracts disproportionate benefits. Undertaking retrenchment would place these benefits at risk.¶ Institutional Benefits¶ What goes for the global economy also applies to larger patterns of institutionalized cooperation. Here, too, the leadership enabled by the United States' grand strategy fosters cooperation that generates diffuse benefits for many states but often disproportionately reflects U.S. preferences. This basic premise subsumes three claims.¶ First, benefits flow to the United States from institutionalized cooperation to address a wide range of problems. There is general agreement that a stable, open, and loosely rule-based international order serves the interests of the United States. Indeed, we are aware of no serious studies suggesting that U.S. interests would be better advanced in a world that is closed (i.e., built around blocs and spheres of influence) and devoid of basic, agreed-upon rules and institutions. As scholars have long argued, under conditions of rising complex interdependence, states often can benefit from institutionalized cooperation.109¶ In the security realm, newly emerging threats arguably are producing a rapid rise in the benefits of such cooperation for the United States. Some of these threats are transnational and emerge from environmental, health, and resource vulnerabilities, such as those concerning pandemics. Transnational nonstate groups with various capacities for violence have also become salient in recent decades, including groups involved in terrorism, piracy, and organized crime.110 [End Page 46] As is widely argued, these sorts of nontraditional, transnational threats can be realistically addressed only through various types of collective action.111 Unless countries are prepared to radically restrict their integration into an increasingly globalized world system, the problems must be solved through coordinated action. 112 In the face of these diffuse and shifting threats, the United States is going to find itself needing to work with other states to an increasing degree, sharing information, building capacities, and responding to crises.113¶ Second, U.S. leadership increases the prospects that such cooperation will emerge in a manner relatively favorable to U.S. interests. Of course, the prospects for cooperation are partly a function of compatible interests. Yet even when interests overlap, scholars of all theoretical stripes have established that institutionalized cooperation does not emerge effortlessly: generating agreement on the particular cooperative solution can often be elusive. And when interests do not overlap, the bargaining becomes tougher yet: not just how, but whether cooperation will occur is on the table. Many factors affect the initiation of cooperation, and under various conditions states can and have cooperated without hegemonic leadership.114 As noted above, however, scholars acknowledge that the likelihood of cooperation drops in the absence of leadership.¶ Finally, U.S. security commitments are an integral component of this leadership. Historically, as Gilpin and other theorists of hegemonic order have shown, the background security and stability that the United States provided facilitated the creation of multilateral institutions for ongoing cooperation across policy areas.115 As in the case of the global economy, U.S. security provision [End Page 47] plays a role in fostering stability within and across regions, and this has an impact on the ability of states to engage in institutional cooperation. Institutional cooperation is least likely in areas of the world where instability is pervasive. It is more likely to flourish in areas where states are secure and leaders can anticipate stable and continuous relations—where the "shadow of the future" is most evident. And because of the key security role it plays in fostering this institutional cooperation, the United States is in a stronger position to help shape the contours of these cooperative efforts.¶ The United States' extended system of security commitments creates a set of institutional relationships that foster political communication. Alliance institutions are in the first instance about security protection, but they are also mechanisms that provide a kind of "political architecture" that is useful beyond narrow issues of military affairs. Alliances bind states together and create institutional channels of communication. NATO has facilitated ties and associated institutions—such as the Atlantic Council—that increase the ability of the United States and Europe to talk to each other and do business.116 Likewise, the bilateral alliances in East Asia also play a communication role beyond narrow security issues. Consultations and exchanges spill over into other policy areas.117 For example, when U.S. officials travel to Seoul to consult on alliance issues, they also routinely talk about other pending issues, such as, recently, the Korea-United States Free Trade Agreement and the Trans-Pacific Partnership. This gives the United States the capacity to work across issue areas, using assets and bargaining chips in one area to make progress in another. It also provides more diffuse political benefits to cooperation that flow from the "voice opportunities" created by the security alliance architecture.118 The alliances provide channels and access points for wider flows of communication—and [End Page 48] the benefits of greater political solidarity and institutional cooperation that follow.¶ The benefits of these communication flows cut across all international issues, but are arguably enhanced with respect to generating security cooperation to deal with new kinds of threats—such as terrorism and health pandemics—that require a multitude of novel bargains and newly established procedures of shared responsibilities among a wide range of countries. With the existing U.S.-led security system in place, the United States is in a stronger position than it otherwise would be to strike bargains and share burdens of security cooperation in such areas. The challenge of rising security interdependence is greater security cooperation. That is, when countries are increasingly mutually vulnerable to nontraditional, diffuse, transnational threats, they need to work together to eradicate the conditions that allow for these threats and limit the damage. The U.S.-led alliance system is a platform with already existing capacities and routines for security cooperation. These assets can be used or adapted, saving the cost of generating security cooperation from scratch. In short, having an institution in place to facilitate cooperation on one issue makes it easier, and more likely, that the participating states will be able to achieve cooperation rapidly on a related issue.119¶ The usefulness of the U.S. alliance system for generating enhanced non-security cooperation is confirmed in interviews with former State Department and National Security Council officials. One former administration official noted, using the examples of Australia and South Korea, that the security ties "create nonsecurity benefits in terms of support for global agenda issues," such as Afghanistan, Copenhagen, disaster relief, and the financial crisis. "This is not security leverage per se, but it is an indication of how the deepness of the security relationship creates working relationships [and] interoperability that can then be leveraged to address other regional issues." This official notes, "We could not have organized the Core Group (India, U.S., Australia, Japan) in [End Page 49] response to the 2004 tsunami without the deep bilateral military relationships that had already been in place. It was much easier for us to organize with these countries almost immediately (within forty-eight hours) than anyone else for a large-scale humanitarian operation because our militaries were accustomed to each other."120¶ The United States' role as security provider also has a more direct effect of enhancing its authority and capacity to initiate institutional cooperation in various policy areas. The fact that the United States is a security patron of Japan, South Korea, and other countries in East Asia, for example, gives it a weight and presence in regional diplomacy over the shape and scope of multilateral cooperation not just within the region but also elsewhere. This does not mean that the United States always wins these diplomatic encounters, but its leverage is greater than it would be if the United States were purely an offshore great power without institutionalized security ties to the region.¶ In sum, the deep engagement strategy enables U.S. leadership, which results in more cooperation on matters of importance than would occur if the United States disengaged—even as it pushes cooperation toward U.S. preferences.
A ‘superpower’ is a country that wields enough military, political and economic might to convince nations in all parts of the world to do things they otherwise wouldn't. Pundits have rushed to label China the next superpower—and so have many ordinary Americans—but the rumors of America’s decline have been greatly exaggerated. In the key categories of power, the U.S. will remain dominant for the foreseeable future. These facts show why America is still the world’s only superpower, and why that won’t change anytime soon. 1. Economics China’s economy is growing at an impressive rate. But it’s not just the size of an economy that matters—it’s also the quality. According to the World Bank, GDP per capita in the US was $53,042 in 2013; in China it was just $6,807. In other words, little of China’s dramatic economic growth is finding its way into the pockets of Chinese consumers—the byproduct of an economy driven by massive state-owned enterprises rather than private industry. China’s headline growth may be higher, but it’s the U.S. economy that’s allowing its citizens to grow along with it. And crucially, the American economy remains the bedrock of the global financial system. Over 80% of all financial transactions worldwide are conducted in dollars, as are 87% of foreign currency market transactions. As long as the world continues to place such faith in America’s currency and overall economic stability, the U.S. economy remains the one to beat. (World Bank, Mon€¥ $ Ban£ing) 2. Military America’s military superiority remains unrivaled—full stop. The US accounts for 37% of global military spending, and spends more than four times what China, the world’s No. 2 spender, does on its military. The U.S. dominates across land, sea, air and space. America’s Middle East misadventures gave the U.S. military a black eye, but the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan speak more to the changing nature of warfare than declining U.S. military superiority. Terrorists and guerilla fighters give conventional military powers fits by design. The U.S. must ultimately learn to scale down to better meet those challenges. Nevertheless, while conventional military strength might not deter terrorists, it still does a terrific job of deterring hostile nations. (International Institute for Strategic Studies) 3. Political Influence Political power comes in many dimensions. For the U.S., foreign aid is an effective way to cement its political clout globally. In 2013, the U.S. doled out $32.7 billion in financial assistance; second was the UK at $19 billion. Turns out that money buys strong political cooperation from countries in need. But in order to have political power abroad, you must first have stability at home. The U.S. has the oldest working national constitution in the world, as well as strong institutions and rule of law to accompany it. While far from perfect, the governing document created by America’s founding fathers has evolved along with its people. The numbers show the enduring attraction of this system: 45 million people living in the U.S. today were born in a foreign country. That is more than four times higher than the next highest country. For many people around the world, America remains the ideal place to start a new life. (Washington Post, PolitiFact.com, Pew Research Center) 4. Innovation Of the 9 largest tech companies in the world, 8 are based in the U.S. Give the growing importance of the technology sector, that’s a big deal. For decades America worried about energy dependency, yet today America is the world’s No. 1 producer of oil and natural gas, in large part due to the development of hydraulic fracturing, a product of public research and private energy. America’s research universities and scientific institutions are best in class, allowing the nation to focus its ingenuity where it’s needed most. And America is spending the money to keep its comparative advantage intact: 30% of all research and development dollars are spent in the U.S. (Bloomberg, Bloomberg, US News, National Science Board) 5. Culture/Lifestyle In 2012, Americans spent $370 million on pet costumes. Earlier this year the Fury 325 opened up in North Carolina, claiming the title of world’s tallest rollercoaster—until 2016, when the next ‘giga’ coaster is scheduled to open in Orlando, Florida. In the most recent Charities Aid Foundation survey, Americans ranked #1 internationally when it came to helping strangers. These stats may seem disconnected, but together they point to the fact that Americans continue to enjoy a quality of life unmatched by the rest of the world. When you combine this with America’s strength across the board in economics, military, political influence and innovation, it is no wonder that the U.S. enjoys its privileged position in the world today. Superpower indeed. (TIME, The Guardian, Charities Aid Foundation)
Not so long ago, a high-ranking Chinese official, who obviously had concluded that America's decline and China's rise were both inevitable, noted in a burst of candor to a senior U.S. official: "But, please, let America not decline too quickly." Although the inevitability of the Chinese leader's expectation is still far from certain, he was right to be cautious when looking forward to America's demise. For if America falters, the world is unlikely to be dominated by a single preeminent successor -- not even China. International uncertainty, increased tension among global competitors, and even outright chaos would be far more likely outcomes. While a sudden, massive crisis of the American system -- for instance, another financial crisis -- would produce a fast-moving chain reaction leading to global political and economic disorder, a steady drift by America into increasingly pervasive decay or endlessly widening warfare with Islam would be unlikely to produce, even by 2025, an effective global successor. No single power will be ready by then to exercise the role that the world, upon the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, expected the United States to play: the leader of a new, globally cooperative world order. More probable would be a protracted phase of rather inconclusive realignments of both global and regional power, with no grand winners and many more losers, in a setting of international uncertainty and even of potentially fatal risks to global well-being. Rather than a world where dreams of democracy flourish, a Hobbesian world of enhanced national security based on varying fusions of authoritarianism, nationalism, and religion could ensue. The leaders of the world's second-rank powers, among them India, Japan, Russia, and some European countries, are already assessing the potential impact of U.S. decline on their respective national interests. The Japanese, fearful of an assertive China dominating the Asian mainland, may be thinking of closer links with Europe. Leaders in India and Japan may be considering closer political and even military cooperation in case America falters and China rises. Russia, while perhaps engaging in wishful thinking (even schadenfreude) about America's uncertain prospects, will almost certainly have its eye on the independent states of the former Soviet Union. Europe, not yet cohesive, would likely be pulled in several directions: Germany and Italy toward Russia because of commercial interests, France and insecure Central Europe in favor of a politically tighter European Union, and Britain toward manipulating a balance within the EU while preserving its special relationship with a declining United States. Others may move more rapidly to carve out their own regional spheres: Turkey in the area of the old Ottoman Empire, Brazil in the Southern Hemisphere, and so forth. None of these countries, however, will have the requisite combination of economic, financial, technological, and military power even to consider inheriting America's leading role. China, invariably mentioned as America's prospective successor, has an impressive imperial lineage and a strategic tradition of carefully calibrated patience, both of which have been critical to its overwhelmingly successful, several-thousand-year-long history. China thus prudently accepts the existing international system, even if it does not view the prevailing hierarchy as permanent. It recognizes that success depends not on the system's dramatic collapse but on its evolution toward a gradual redistribution of power. Moreover, the basic reality is that China is not yet ready to assume in full America's role in the world. Beijing's leaders themselves have repeatedly emphasized that on every important measure of development, wealth, and power, China will still be a modernizing and developing state several decades from now, significantly behind not only the United States but also Europe and Japan in the major per capita indices of modernity and national power. Accordingly, Chinese leaders have been restrained in laying any overt claims to global leadership.   At some stage, however, a more assertive Chinese nationalism could arise and damage China's international interests. A swaggering, nationalistic Beijing would unintentionally mobilize a powerful regional coalition against itself. None of China's key neighbors -- India, Japan, and Russia -- is ready to acknowledge China's entitlement to America's place on the global totem pole. They might even seek support from a waning America to offset an overly assertive China. The resulting regional scramble could become intense, especially given the similar nationalistic tendencies among China's neighbors. A phase of acute international tension in Asia could ensue. Asia of the 21st century could then begin to resemble Europe of the 20th century -- violent and bloodthirsty. At the same time, the security of a number of weaker states located geographically next to major regional powers also depends on the international status quo reinforced by America's global preeminence -- and would be made significantly more vulnerable in proportion to America's decline. The states in that exposed position -- including Georgia, Taiwan, South Korea, Belarus, Ukraine, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Israel, and the greater Middle East -- are today's geopolitical equivalents of nature's most endangered species. Their fates are closely tied to the nature of the international environment left behind by a waning America, be it ordered and restrained or, much more likely, self-serving and expansionist. A faltering United States could also find its strategic partnership with Mexico in jeopardy. America's economic resilience and political stability have so far mitigated many of the challenges posed by such sensitive neighborhood issues as economic dependence, immigration, and the narcotics trade. A decline in American power, however, would likely undermine the health and good judgment of the U.S. economic and political systems. A waning United States would likely be more nationalistic, more defensive about its national identity, more paranoid about its homeland security, and less willing to sacrifice resources for the sake of others' development. The worsening of relations between a declining America and an internally troubled Mexico could even give rise to a particularly ominous phenomenon: the emergence, as a major issue in nationalistically aroused Mexican politics, of territorial claims justified by history and ignited by cross-border incidents. Another consequence of American decline could be a corrosion of the generally cooperative management of the global commons -- shared interests such as sea lanes, space, cyberspace, and the environment, whose protection is imperative to the long-term growth of the global economy and the continuation of basic geopolitical stability. In almost every case, the potential absence of a constructive and influential U.S. role would fatally undermine the essential communality of the global commons because the superiority and ubiquity of American power creates order where there would normally be conflict. None of this will necessarily come to pass. Nor is the concern that America's decline would generate global insecurity, endanger some vulnerable states, and produce a more troubled North American neighborhood an argument for U.S. global supremacy. In fact, the strategic complexities of the world in the 21st century make such supremacy unattainable. But those dreaming today of America's collapse would probably come to regret it. And as the world after America would be increasingly complicated and chaotic, it is imperative that the United States pursue a new, timely strategic vision for its foreign policy -- or start bracing itself for a dangerous slide into global turmoil.
Too often peace and human rights are treated as ideas that overlap on a Venn diagram rather than as ideals that cannot exist without one another. The relationship between peace and human rights goes beyond a shared connection. Without peace, universal and comprehensive human rights are unattainable. Without the attainment of universal and comprehensive human rights, there is no peace. Historically, warzones have been treated as human rights–free zones. Only relatively recently have there been efforts to ensure that international human rights law is applied in conjunction with international humanitarian law (the laws of war) during times of war in order to promote human rights protections. How successful these efforts have been is debatable, but their importance is not. It can be argued that such efforts are part of a recognition that violence and war impede negative peace and positive peace, thus impeding the right to human rights. Therefore, in times of war, it is paramount that the promotion and protection of human rights be a top priority. Typically, outside of a warzone, structural violence poses the greater threat to peace than the systematic physical violence that accompanies war. Drones are somewhat unique in this regard; drones achieve what war achieves in locations in which there is an absence of war. Drones pose a continuous and intolerable threat to the right to peace of those living beneath them. Drones are used to perpetrate immediate physical violence against communities, arbitrarily denying some of their members the right to life. Drones also inflict on entire communities a constant state of fear, exacerbating existing forms of structural violence and creating new forms that were not previously present. That drones alone can undermine negative and positive peace, and, therefore, the right to human rights, outside of a warzone without the regular use of physical violence, but only the threat thereof, is quite an infamous accomplishment.
The wide variation in the estimates of ‘militants’ and ‘civilians’ killed across these two datasets raises some questions about the validity and reliability of the underlying news reports. First, it is nearly impossible to verify the number of civilians killed in a drone strike. Most of these drone strikes are concentrated in ungoverned spaces of Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia where the central government has only limited ability to monitor attacks or investigate their effects. As a result, most of the casualty estimates are educated guesses, varying significantly in both numbers and types of victims.27 Moreover, casualties from drone strikes are removed from the area of the attack and buried by sunset in accordance with Muslim law, which makes verification of the numbers killed and the identity of the victims nearly impossible.28 Second, government and intelligence officials in both the United States and the targeted states often assert without evidence that all those killed were either ‘militants’ or ‘civilians’.29 These assertions are often presented as fact in the newspaper articles that underlie most of the available datasets. Third, the casualty numbers are subject to a considerable amount of spin on all sides.30 For example, Islamist groups inflate the number of people killed in US strikes and aggressively push their higher casualty totals to local and international media outlets. Similarly, the US often underestimates the number of casualties from drone strikes, even when the available evidence suggests that some civilian deaths have occurred. For example, Brennan declared that there were absolutely no civilian casualties from drone strikes between June 2010 and June 2011.31 Against clear evidence to the contrary, another senior Obama administration official claimed that casualties were in the ‘single digits’ and suggested that those reporting hundreds of civilians dead were foolishly using enemy propaganda.32 While there are reasons to suspect that drone strikes are becoming more accurate and causing fewer civilian casualties than they did between 2004 and 2008, there is no reason to believe that the civilian death toll hovers in the single digits, and the estimates from the best-sourced database (TBIJ) suggest that the tallies of civilian deaths are much higher.33
As US covert drone strikes become more entrenched as an accepted counterterrorism strategy, the US government needs to conduct a thorough accounting of the impact on civilians, said a new report released today by Columbia Law School’s Human Rights Clinic and Center for Civilians in Conflict. The Civilian Impact of Drones: Unexamined Costs, Unanswered Questions is the first systematic study of the US government’s covert drone program and its impact on civilian populations. The US claims of precision and the low number of civilian casualties caused by drone strikes, while not empirically disproven, obscure key questions about civilian harm in Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia. “Drones are a technological advance, but in practice they carry their own problems for minimizing harm to civilians, especially when used in places with fewer US boots on the ground,” said Naureen Shah, Acting Director of the Human Rights Clinic at Columbia. “For example, drones produce a flood of video data that’s hard to corroborate, and it’s nearly impossible to properly investigate who was actually killed or injured.” Signature strikes—strikes that target individuals based on patterns of behavior identified by US intelligence—are particularly risky for civilians. According to The Civilian Impact of Drones, without an understanding of the local context, power dynamics, and cultural practices, drone operators may interpret routine behavior as suspicious, and mistakenly target civilians. The report finds that drone operations are setting the US on an untested and unexamined course. The CIA and the military’s Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC) have taken a lead role in these campaigns that, due to government secrecy, the public knows little about. Neither organization has ever described the rules and mechanisms it employs to protect civilians, track deaths or investigate reports of civilian harm. Additionally, neither the CIA nor JSOC have ever conducted strikes on this scale or with this degree of collusion; even high-level policymakers do not always know which organization is responsible for a strike, or which to hold accountable for civilian harm. Civilians have no one to turn to if their loved ones are harmed or if their homes are destroyed. “Drones are becoming synonymous with US counterterrorism strategy,” said Sarah Holewinski, executive director of the Center for Civilians in Conflict. “But unlike in regular wars, policymakers are failing to ask the hard questions here, including whether other tactics or strategies are more appropriate than drone strikes, and whether US expansion of drone operations is causing more harm than good.” The report recommends that the White House establish an interagency task force to evaluate the impact of drone strikes, and calls on the CIA and Department of Defense to disclose their policies on civilian protection and response to civilian harm. Congress should review these agencies’ policies and procedures in this regard, and also intensely scrutinize claims by the CIA and JSOC that strikes have a limited impact on civilian populations in light of credible reports to the contrary.
In a grand strategy of restraint, drone strikes are a political tool to support partners against their adversaries and show that the United States is willing to limit its own power. Yet drone strikes, in underlining U.S. unilateralism and its fearsome power-projection capabilities, may also contribute to cooperation against the United States, or resistance to its demands. Concern about the ethical and human-rights aspects of U.S. drone strikes may drain away goodwill on the part of liberal friends, hindering U.S. diplomatic efforts in other issue areas. Drone strikes are pinpricks against weak non-state actors that matter little to U.S. security. Selective engagement is a more muscular and more diplomatically-oriented grand strategy than restraint. Yet it has even less room for drone strikes. In the selective engagement approach to security, U.S. global leadership is based on military primacy and U.S. willingness to use its power to advance others' interests along with its own. Conventional military power buys the United States the diplomatic benefits that may come with the careful exercise of great strength. Drone strikes are pinpricks against weak non-state actors that matter little to U.S. security. In a world of state actors, where U.S. security rests primarily upon continued peace and prosperity among the Eurasian powers, terrorist groups pose relatively little threat. Unless terrorists obtain WMD and succeed in a grand attack on the homeland, their capability to harm U.S. interests is far more limited than their will. In addition, not all terrorist groups have the will to attack the U.S. homeland or U.S. interests abroad. Concerns about anti-Americanisms and radicalization play a negligible role in selective engagement. Diplomatically, U.S. policymakers can use the ability to strike on behalf of another to shape partner behavior if they are willing to hold off on potential strikes when politically necessary, even if a strike is militarily possible and desirable. Yet drone strikes undermine efforts to consolidate democracy and protect human rights when policymakers use them to support strongmen. The use of drone strikes, particularly if seen as illegal and unethical, is likely to strain relations with Western partners unless these partners perceive benefit for themselves as well as for the United States. The other side of the coin is that liberal states' normative opposition to drone strikes may provide leverage for those seeking benefits from the United States. Questions about drone strikes must stretch beyond concerns about anti-Americanism, radicalization, and terrorism to consider the strikes' political utility for broader U.S. interests. This analysis finds that whether one identifies anti-Americanisms as a significant threat to U.S. interests or not, and whether one identifies terrorism as a major threat to the United States or not, the role of drone strikes in assuring U.S. security at home and abroad is quite limited and likely to become more so as counter-drone efforts and others' acquisition of drones reduce U.S. air supremacy, as seen with the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq and as the United States again faces   state rather than non-state adversaries.
Drones themselves seem clearly to cause a high level of psychological harm. A report by the International Human Rights and Conflict Resolution Clinic of Stanford Law School and the Global Justice Clinic at New York University School of Law, “Living Under Drones: Death, Injury and Trauma to Civilians from US Drone Practices in Pakistan,” offers the following, rather horrifying, picture: “Importantly, those interviewed for this report also described how the presence of drones and capacity of the US to strike anywhere at any time led to constant and severe fear, anxiety, and stress, especially when taken together with the inability of those on the ground to ensure their own safety. Further, those interviewed stated that the fear of strikes undermines people’s sense of safety to such an extent that it has at times affected their willingness to engage in a wide variety of activities, including social gatherings, educational and economic opportunities, funerals, and that fear has also undermined general community trust. In addition, the US practice of striking one area multiple times, and its record of killing first responders, makes both community members and humanitarian workers afraid to assist injured victims.” (“Living Under Drones,” 2012: 55) While many weapons used in war cause psychological harm, this description is largely unique to drones. While evidence surveyed by Avery Plaw indicates that drones are no less precise than other forms of attack (and may indeed be better at avoiding civilian casualties), drones fire explosive ordinance that can give the impression of imprecision (Plaw, 2013: 126). The following account should help illustrate: 5 “Interviewees described the experience of living under constant surveillance as harrowing. In the words of one interviewee: ‘God knows whether they’ll strike us again or not. But they’re always surveying us, they’re always over us, and you never know when they’re going to strike and attack.’” (“Living Under Drones,” 2012: 81) This account focuses on the ability for drones to strike at any moment, as do many others in the report. This seems to highlight the biggest difference in ability between drones and manned aircraft: while manned aircraft generally cannot hover over an area for an extended period of time, due to the presence of a human pilot, drones can remain over an area for up to twenty-four hours, giving the impression of constant surveillance (Strawser, 2010: 355; “Living Under Drones,” 2012: 9). While soldiers on the ground can remain in an area for an extended period, they generally are not using missiles to eliminate their targets, and their presence is not constantly announced by a noise overhead. Highlighting the apparent inescapability of drones, David Rohde, a journalist kidnapped by combatants in Pakistan, reported: “From the ground, it is impossible to determine who or what they are tracking as they circle overhead. The buzz of a distant propeller is a constant reminder of imminent death. Drones fire missiles that travel faster than the speed of sound. A drone's victim never hears the missile that kills him.” (Rohde, 2012 , also cited in “Living Under Drones,” 2012: 80) The features Rohde describes all help drones to be more effective in fighting enemy combatants, but clearly contribute to the psychological harm of civilians living in the area as well. While there are other forms of attack that provide similar worries, including, but not limited to, artillery strikes and manned air strikes, those each have technical limitations that prevent them from causing these same levels of psychological harm. Artillery is not visible or audible overhead, and so cannot create this fear before a strike, and the limitations of manned air strikes have already been mentioned. A further feature of these reports, as well as others, is that they contribute to the negative perception of drones. Even if civilian casualties from drone strikes are in fact rare, reports of civilian casualties, both physical and psychological, will contribute to the fear caused by drones. While it seems clear that drones can and perhaps do cause greater levels of psychological harm than other forms of military action, it is not immediately clear how this harm is relevant to the permissibility of drone use. Drones reduce the risk of physical harm to our soldiers, and it is not clear how physical and psychological harms should be compared. In what follows, I will discuss the role that the aforementioned psychological harm should play in our assessment of the permissibility of drone use. An important distinction here is between two sorts of military action: those that occur in the course of “standard” war, and those that are aimed at non-state actors in a counterinsurgency setting. The psychological harm described above is likely to be prevalent in standard war regardless of weapons used: if a village is caught in combat between two armies, drones will likely be among the least of civilian worries. Artillery strikes, with the potential to be far less precise than drones, become a significant danger, and there is the risk of large-scale fighting taking place among civilian residences; these are all likely to have an equal or greater propensity to disrupt the lives of civilians. While drones may well add to this fear for the reasons mentioned above, it is difficult to accept that this addition would be significant. Drones deployed away from the front may cause harm similar to that in counterinsurgency cases; due to their location away from the front, however, alternative strategies will be more limited. The use of drones in counterinsurgency operations is a more difficult issue. Unlike cases of open war between countries, where psychological harm may be unavoidable, it seems quite avoidable in these cases of more limited military action. Each of the accounts offered above is in reference to drones being used to attack non-state combatants, not soldiers in a state army. The behavior of the non-state combatants toward the local population will likely determine the “default” level of fear in a particular area; if the above accounts from “Living Under Drones” are any indication, the presence of drones does significantly change the status quo experienced by civilians in the relevant areas of Pakistan. Unlike in the case of conventional war, it seems likely that other methods of attacking insurgents may generate less psychological harm in civilians without increasing the risk of physical harm; e.g. deploying a small team of soldiers with particular training to avoid civilian casualties. Given the status of psychological harm as some form of collateral damage, it might seem that we are obligated to choose these other methods. Whether we are in fact obligated to choose those other methods will depend on which theory we accept regarding civilian harm. The primary candidates are the Doctrine of Double Effect (with various modifications), Act Utilitarianism, and liability theories4 . While the bulk of this paper is devoted to discussing these theories, I will quickly discuss Act Utilitarianism here. Its assessment of drone use is quite straightforward: if drone use causes more harm than alternative means of achieving the same outcome in a particular case, then it is impermissible in that case. I have suggested here that the psychological harm caused by drones might cause it to fail this condition; however, whether or not this is the case is an empirical matter. If, for example, claims that drones are less likely to cause civilian deaths are true, then there may well be cases where the decreased chance of civilian death outweighs thepsychological harm. Given that actual civilian deaths (in cases involving drones and other strategies) seem to be controllable to a greater degree than psychological harm resulting from drone use, it seems that we may well reach a point where drones are nearly guaranteed to cause more harm than at least some alternatives, though this will obviously vary between cases. In some cases, of course, drones will be the only option, and so the benefits of the operation will determine its permissibility; for instance the combatants may inaccessible without drones. But in many cases alternatives will be feasible. While I will discuss other theories in more detail later, the general claim that one ought to reduce collateral damage when possible is endorsed by all of them, and these considerations support the conclusion that we can indeed reduce collateral damage by not using drones, and so we ought not to use drones. This conclusion, however, fails to account for the increased risk to soldiers engaging in counterinsurgency operations. Importantly, any operation where we choose not to use a drone is one where at least one person in our military is placed at increased risk of physical and/or psychological harm; after all, at least one person will be present in the area who otherwise would not have been. It is the ability to decrease risk to our soldiers that motivates Strawser’s argument in favor of the use of drones. Strawser defines the Principle of Unnecessary Risk as follows: “If X gives Y an order to accomplish good goal G, then X has an obligation, other things being equal, to chose a means to accomplish G that does not violate the demands of justice, make the world worse, or expose Y to potentially lethal risk unless incurring such risk aids in the accomplishment of G in some way that cannot be gained via less risky means.” (Strawser, 2010: 344) This principle should, on Strawser’s account, oblige us to use drones, as their existence makes the risk to our soldiers unnecessary in many cases. As Strawser admits, however, this all relies 9 on the ceteris paribus clause in the Principle of Unnecessary Risk: in many of these cases, other things will not be equal due to the psychological harm caused by drones. Several philosophers have endorsed the claim that, in at least some cases, soldiers must take the risk of additional harm on themselves in order to protect civilians; I will discuss some of these claims later, but for the moment will add that this result is intuitive. If, for example, a civilian population was fully innocent, that is to say not at all aiding the unjust combatants (and not responsible for the conflict), and the unjust combatants are harming them by occupying their village, the claim that just soldiers should avoid causing even further harm to these civilians does not seem unreasonable, even if doing so requires the just soldiers to take on additional risks. Obviously, this issue is not settled, but I will return to it later in the paper. This result, if true, may still appear strange; after all, the potential harm to the soldiers is physical, while the harm to civilians is psychological. This difference is important: it makes justifying the increased risk placed on the soldiers more difficult. Given two factors noted earlier in this paper, however, it seems we do have this justification in some cases. First, while the harm to civilians is psychological, it may still be significant; while balancing different kinds of harm is difficult, there is no reason to think that psychological harm could not be as morally significant as physical harm, even death, if the psychological harm is severe enough and inflicted upon a large enough number of people. Drones seem especially prone to inflicting this psychological harm through their very presence. Second, the position of civilians who lack responsibility for the actions of the insurgents is a particularly unenviable one; even if they are not actively being threatened by the insurgents, they know that attacks on these insurgents may easily result in collateral damage. Finally, the potential physical harm to the soldiers is just that: potential harm. The psychological harm caused by drones is, as I have attempted to indicate here, effectively 10 certain. It is dependent simply on there being civilians in the broad area, not on the particular aiming of the drone operator. In most cases, there will merely be a risk of harm to the soldiers that would have to be deployed instead of a drone. This risk should be taken seriously, but the fact that it is a risk should cause it to weigh less in the comparison. The following principle seems to be a reasonable conclusion from the above discussion: in cases where the use of a drone would cause civilians greater harm, physical or psychological than an alternative form of action, the civilians bear little responsibility for the actions of the target insurgents, and the added risk to our soldiers from choosing the alternative action is not excessive, we ought not use drones.
Today we witness not only that history has not ended, but that there has been a revival of authoritarianism. Moreover, it has taken on a more insidious form marked by the resurrection of the ghosts of the past, made all the more sinister because all too often authoritarianism has adopted the trappings of democracy.
Confronting authoritarianism means ensuring greater protection for political freedoms and the dynamic exchange of views. It also means the further empowerment of women and the adoption of a proactive social- justice agenda. Above all, good governance must remain the touchstone. It is true that conventional views of governmental legitimacy tend to put the emphasis on democratic rights, but it is increasingly understood that good governance may need to take precedence.
Unlike the DDE, the utilitarian argument for excusing collateral damage does not rely on intentions. The utilitarian argument holds that an attack is permissible if it will ultimately lead to a lower amount of suffering than if the attack were not carried out. It excuses attacks that inflict harm on civilians when they shorten a war or prevent a greater future harm. In fact, according to many variants of utilitarianism, an attack that will reduce the total amount of suffering caused by a war is not only justified but also obligatory because acts of commission and acts of omission are equally blameworthy (Williams 1973). Although this argument is less influential in work on just war theory and military ethics because it is at odds with non-combatant immunity, it is popular among policy makers and there is some evidence that soldiers apply an intuitive form of this reasoning to resolve the moral dilemmas they encounter in combat (Grayling 2006; Slim 2010: 151–2). The utilitarian argument is often mobilized to justify attacks that would be indefensible using the DDE because utilitarianism does not recognize non-combatant immunity or forbid any means of attack (Brandt 1972).2 For this reason, it is one of the most popular defences of the Allied aerial bombings during World War II, especially the attacks that were carried out against non-military targets or using atomic weapons (Grayling 2006; Slim 2010: 151–2). The bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki are among the most controversial attacks of the war and they do not seem to be justifiable using the DDE. Although each of the cities had some military importance, the bombs targeted civilian areas of each city. Moreover, it would be very difficult to maintain that the bombs were proportional, given the limited value of the military targets compared to the enormous civilian casualties. Although the DDE offers little help for those who support the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, there are strong reasons in favour of the attacks from a utilitarian standpoint. The bombings may have been the decisive factor in avoiding Operation Olympic – the proposed amphibious invasion of Japan. This operation might have produced a death toll far greater than that inflicted by the atomic bombs. President Truman used this defence, arguing that an invasion would have cost as many as 1 million lives (Skates 2000: 76). Although Truman’s casualty estimate was probably too high, military planners thought that the number of American casualties could be as high as 500,000 (Skates 2000: 77–9) – more than enough to outweigh the casualties inflicted by the bombs. Although most academic discussions of the utilitarian justification involve large attacks, using aerial bombardment and missile strikes, it is important to remember that it can be used by military personnel at all levels. Dexter Filkins provides one good example of two American marines who use a utilitarian decision procedure to decide whether to shoot at Iraqi insurgents who are near civilians (2003). Although the marines have a right to return fire in self-defence, regardless of the circumstances, they decide that they will only return fire when few civilians are in danger of 2 Although non-combatant immunity has been rejected by both act utilitarians and rule utilitarians, some argue that rule utilitarianism can be used to affirm non-combatant immunity (Nathanson 2010). The marines tell Filkins that it is not worth returning fire if multiple civilians may be killed but that they will return fire if they only risk hitting one. As they explain it, this decision is a matter of weighing the number of civilians in danger against the threat of the insurgent shooting an American soldier and possibly carrying out attacks in the future. They therefore show that utilitarian reasoning can be applied to ethical challenges at the tactical level, in addition to those at the strategic and operational levels.
Among the central problems for utilitarianism in any context is predicting the consequences different courses of action may produce or, when it is applied to past events, speculating about what effects a different decision might have had. Returning to the example of the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, it is far from clear that the bombing campaign against Japan saved lives, especially when one factors in the attacks on other cities, which would bring the total casualties to around 300,000 killed and 400,000 wounded (Conway-Lanz 2006: 1). Moreover, it is possible that there may have been a third way of defeating Japan that would have inflicted fewer casualties. Bombing may have been the least destructive way of winning the war, but justifying it on utilitarian grounds leaves it up to endless debate and consideration of less destructive alternatives. One reason for this difficulty is that those who apply utilitarianism seem to think that it should only be applied at the moment of decision and that all consequences of the decision should be allowed to naturally unfold without intervention. The casualty estimates of acting and those of not acting are weighed against each other as though they were unchangeable facts about each prospective course of action that would not be altered by subsequent action. The extent of the harm an attack will produce is largely determined by the target selected and the means used to destroy it, yet the harm can also be controlled once an attack has taken place. Much of the collateral damage, especially for attacks with weapons of mass destruction, cannot be repaired. Those who are killed and mortally wounded cannot be saved. Nevertheless, many people who become collateral damage suffer less serious injuries. It would be wrong to add these people to the casualty estimates and to treat their wounds as something that is intrinsic to the decision itself if there is a chance that their suffering could be reduced. Thus, the underlying problem of the utilitarian justification of collateral damage is that the utilitarian calculus is usually applied synchronically; it is used to judge the morality of an attack at one point in time before it is carried out. It is uncommon for those invoking the utilitarian justification to consider the way the utilitarian calculus may shift after an attack has been carried out or how the consequences of actions might be mitigated by subsequent actions. This can lead those invoking the utilitarian justification to overlook the ways in which the moral quality of an attack might be changed by attempts to control the damage.
China’s no-rules approach to armed drone exports has Beijing positioned to dominate the rapidly growing multibillion-dollar market, frustrating American companies while presenting real national security dangers for the Trump administration.
Once upon a time, the sight would have been unthinkable: The MQ-1 Predator and its successor, the more lethal MQ-9 Reaper, were for more than a decade synonymous with armed drones. But that now is changing, not because Beijing has built a better drone but because it has been willing to sell them to countries where the United States wouldn’t.
While the Americans are just now moving forward with selling armed drones, China has been going full steam ahead. The CH-4 — a medium-altitude, long-endurance UAV — is part of series of Rainbow drones produced by Aerospace Long-March International.
The Jordanian air force has put up for sale six Chinese-made CH-4B drones. It’s unclear why Amman is trying to get rid of its CH-4s just three years after acquiring them. But it’s possible the divestment is related to Jordan’s ongoing efforts to source Predator-style drones from the United States. “The general command of the Jordanian armed forces ... announces its desire to sell the following aircraft,” the defense ministry in Amman stated on June 3, 2019. The for-sale list includes four CASA transports, an old C-130B cargo plane, 12 Hawk 63 training jets, six MD530 helicopters and six CH-4s. Jordan bought the missile-armed CH-4s, which are broadly similar to General Atomics’ early-model Predators around 2016 after the administration of U.S. president Barack Obama rejected Amman’s request for MQ-1 Predators. General Atomics also makes the larger MQ-9 Reaper drone. The Jordanian air force’s No. 9 Squadron operated the Chinese-made drones. The same unit operates the air force’s other unmanned aerial vehicle, including Schiebel S-100 Camcopters and Leonardo Falcos. It wasn’t until May 2018 that the Jordanian air force displayed a CH-4 in public. “Marketed by Aerospace Long-March International Trade, the CH-4B has found a good market here in the Middle East, in part due to the reluctance of U.S. authorities to sell armed UAVs to their allies in the region,” Al-Monitor reported. “Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Iraq have all acquired the CH-4B armed version, and the type has been employed widely on operations in Yemen and against Daesh targets in Iraq.” But Jordan never gave up trying to get permission to buy American drones, which are widely considered as having better sensors, weapons and communications links than the Chinese drones do. Amman perhaps believes Pres. Donald Trump is more open to approving drone sales to Middle East customers, not only for the military benefit but also as a way of commercially competing with China. “The Donald Trump administration is worried that weapons carrying the ’Made in China’ label are becoming ubiquitous on Middle East battlefields,” Al-Monitor explained. In increasing numbers, traditional U.S. allies are turning to Beijing for technologies that the United States is constrained from exporting as a signatory of international arms control treaties. The Pentagon is increasingly concerned that China’s growing arms sales give the country more clout to secure an economic and military foothold and relationships with U.S. allies in a region where defense officials often control the purse strings. "It's potentially a tool for them to develop closer defense and military ties, particularly for future access,” Assistant Secretary of Defense for Indo-Pacific Affairs Randall Schriver told Al-Monitor at a recent Pentagon briefing. “China is less disciplined, and so there's a proliferation risk as well to regimes that we would regard as not necessarily responsible.” Of course, it’s also possible that Jordan aims to replace the CH-4s with better Chinese-made drones. Based on customers’ experience deploying the CH-4, drone-maker China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation developed the larger and more powerful CH-5. “The CH-5 offers a … 441-pound internal payload for sensors and a … 2,205-pound external payload, permitting it to carry up to 16 precision-guided missiles underwing,” Jane’s reported. “This vehicle is roughly equivalent to the MQ-9 Reaper, although it retains a piston engine instead of the Reaper’s turboprop.”
At least one buyer of China’s copy of the famous Predator is none too happy. Jordan is selling off its fleet of CH-4B “Rainbow” drones after owning them for just two years. The Middle Eastern kingdom was reportedly not happy with the drones’ performance and is seeking to unload them at auction. The CH-4B drones first surfaced in public media in 2016. Built by China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASTC), the CH-4B appears very similar to the General Atomics MQ-9 Reaper armed unmanned aerial vehicle. The CH-4B also carried some impressive specs, with Popular Mechanics noting in July 2016 it could carry, “up to 770 pounds of munitions, including the Blue Arrow 7 laser-guided air-to-surface missile, TG-100 laser, inertial or GPS-guided bombs, and the HJ-10 anti-tank missile.” The Chinese drone could also fly for up to 14 hours, loitering over mission areas for the better part of the day. As late as last year pundits were already calling China a winner of the rush to sell armed drones abroad, as U.S. red tape can often hold up arms sales for years. China does not have that problem and has sold the CH-4B to numerous countries, including Algeria, Nigeria, Jordan, Zambia, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia, Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, Pakistan, and Myanmar. But there's one problem: CASTC has an inferior drone problem. According to FlightGlobal, Jordan has complained about its drone fleet since 2018. The Royal Jordanian Air Force declined to go into specifics as to why the CH-4B is let down, but simply said it was downsizing and removing several types of aircraft from its fleet. According to Shepard Media, as late as November 2018, Jordan admitted it was “not happy with the aircraft’s performance and was looking to retire them.” If you’re interested in a Chinese drone fleet of your own, bidding for the CH-4Bs ends on July 1st.
U.S. President Donald Trump is often portrayed as retreating from global leadership and paving the way for China's unstoppable rise under President Xi Jinping. The reality is more complex. By emphasizing Trump's alleged withdrawal, much of the mainstream liberal U.S. media are unwittingly undermining confidence in America as much as does China's Communist Party propaganda. The shared sentiment is that the U.S. has become more unreliable under Trump, and that America is the past and China is the future. This is a superficially persuasive argument. But it does not stand up to close examination. The U.S. president remains the only world leader who can still say -- as he did in his State of the Union speech -- that "unmatched power is the surest means of our defense." He is right. Nobody else, including Xi, can make such a claim. It cannot be denied that the Chinese political system is better able to consistently pursue long-term goals than the U.S. political system, which is subject to disruptions every election cycle. But it is not as if the Chinese system has been immune to major disruptions since 1949, such as the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution. Xi's concentration of power and shift away from collective leadership potentially creates a single point of failure. We should not forget it was the so-called unreliable American system that put in place and maintained international order over many decades. We should not let anti-Trump prejudices in the U.S. or Trump's outsize personality exaggerate the extent of discontinuity his administration represents. The Trump administration's National Security Strategy (NSS 2017) released in December is a largely mainstream document that makes clear the Trump administration has not eschewed leadership or disavowed the current order, but has a narrower concept of leadership that puts "America first" and stresses a more robust approach to competitors. Some might not like this concept of leadership. But it cannot be called a retreat. NSS 2017 makes clear that the current administration will return to the long-standing U.S. posture of "peace through strength." If we examine the Trump administration's record in East Asia, it represents in many respects a reversion to the norm of U.S. policy. Like his predecessors, Trump has placed priority on relations with China, but unlike Barack Obama, who naively downplayed competition in the hope it would make the Chinese more cooperative, Trump has emphasized both aspects of the relationship. Trump has also reaffirmed U.S. alliances with Japan, South Korea and Australia. There is no sign his administration will let China's claims in the East and South China seas go unchallenged.
The reality is that, despite many commitments by national leaders, the capacity of nation-states to co-ordinate their responses has dwindled. Problems may have gone global but the politics of solving them are as local as ever. It is hard for governments to devote resources to problems beyond their national borders and to work with other nations to address these challenges – while painful problems at home remain unsolved. The changing landscape of global politics also plays a role. As the number and the interests of those sitting at the tables where agreements are negotiated have increased, the opportunities for consensus and concerted action have shrunk. Emerging powers such as the Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa), new international coalitions, and influential nongovernmental players are now demanding a say in the way the world handles its collective problems. Inevitably, when all these disparate and often conflicting interests need to be incorporated into any agreement, the resulting solutions fall short of what is needed to solve the problem. This is why global multilateral agreements in which a large number of countries deliver on co-ordinated commitments have become increasingly rare. When was the last time you heard that an agreement with concrete consequences was reached by a large majority of the world’s nations? I think it was 13 years ago – the Millennium Development Goals. Since then, almost all international summits have yielded meager results, most visibly those seeking to advance the global agendas on trade liberalisation and curbing global warming.
Yet, tightening the rules for financial market regulation is not the only field where the G-20 is failing. Despite the mantra-like repetition of memoranda of understanding, the trade ministers of the G-20 have not been able to overcome their conflicts of interest and reach a settlement in the Doha Round of the World Trade Organization (WTO). What are the reasons for this failure?Although the G-20 managed to prevent a revival of protectionist measures on a broad front in the midst of the crisis, there is a large gap between the announcements of the G-20 and quantifiable results in trade policy. There is not one final communiqué that lacks a clear statement stressing the importance of the WTO and the necessity to conclude the Doha Round. Nonetheless, the reality of trade policy looks very different. All the states that are preventing the conclusion of the Doha Round through their vetoes are members of the G-20.
Equally important, liberal internationalists and others tend to assume that international relations are a positive sum game (Keohane, 1984; Ruggie, 1993). Experiences with multilateralism and with regional international institutions are said to encourage cooperation. Transparency, reciprocity and habits of collaboration are seen as self-reinforcing. In order to achieve their own domestic needs for economic growth, countries find not only these experiences beneficial, but such cooperation spills over across related functions and issue areas. A generation ago, scholars writing and theorizing about regional integration in Western Europe defined this process as one of ‘spillover’. For liberal internationalists and globalists there is at least an implied analogy with that European experience despite the immense differences in geography, history and path dependence.5 That assumption has some basis in the areas of economics and trade, though the mercantilist and predatory behavior of China provides a serious contrary indicator. In the security realm, however, there is little reason for such an optimistic assumption. Cases in point include nuclear proliferation (North Korea, Iran), tensions in East Asia (China, Japan, Vietnam, South Korea, the Philippines, the East and South China Seas) and conflicts in the Middle East (Iran, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Egypt, Lebanon, as well as Israel and the Palestinians). Nonetheless there are exceptions. Brazil has played a continuing role in UN Peacekeeping. It assigns nearly 2500 military and police personnel to those missions and has played a leading role in Haiti, where it has commanded the UN’s operation since 2004. It also has headed the maritime component of UNIFIL (Lebanon) since 2011. In addition, Turkey has participated actively in NATO-led peacekeeping missions in Bosnia (SFOR), Kosovo (KFOR), and Afghanistan (ISAF).
The decisions of great powers to transfer arms or form alliances often present intriguing empirical puzzles. In 2015, the United States supported thirty two treaty allies and allocated billions in security assistance worldwide. Surprisingly, U.S. treaty allies received only 2 percent of all U.S. foreign military financing, whereas ªve non-allied countries received more than 90 percent. Among this group of ªve non-allied U.S. partners, Israel received $3.1 billion (55 percent of U.S. foreign military ªnancing), Egypt $1.3 billion (23 percent), Jordan $300 million (5 percent), Pakistan $280 million (5 percent), and Iraq $250 million (5 percent).2 This variation is even more intriguing when considered historically. During the Cold War, the United States provided weapons and alliances to many states, including Pakistan and Taiwan, but transferred arms to Israel without a formal defense pact. Yet Pakistan and Taiwan eventually lost their alliances despite seeing U.S. arms transfers continue, if not increase. Why did the United States modulate its arms and alliances provision during the Cold War? And why would it today decline to offer some states defense pacts but give them more military ªnancing than it does to its treaty allies?
Although the United States has been the hegemon in the Asia-Pacific since the end of World War II, it will probably not remain the dominant presence in the region over the next 25 years. A rising China will pose the critical foreign policy challenge, probably more difficult than the challenge posed by the Soviet Union during the Cold War. This development will lead to the most profound change in the strategic environment of the Asia-Pacific. On the other hand, the rise of China does not automatically mean that conflict is more likely. First, the emergence of a more assertive China does not mean a more aggressive China. Beijing appears content to press its claims peacefully (if forcefully), through existing avenues and institutions of international relations. Second, when we look more closely at the Chinese military buildup, we find that there may be less than some might have us believe, and that the Chinese war machine is not quite as threatening – as some might argue. Instead of Washington perspectives shaping Asia-Pacific affairs, the rise of China is likely to see a new paradigm in international affairs – the “Beijing Consensus” – founded on the leadership role of the authoritarian party state, a technocratic approach to governance, the significance of social rights and obligations, a reassertion of the principles of national sovereignty and non-interference, coupled with support for freer markets and stronger regional and international institutions. The emphasis is on good governance. Japan fits easily in this paradigm. Just as Western dominance in the past century led to Western ideas shaping international institutions and global values, Asian leaders and Asian thinkers will increasingly participate in and shape the global discourse, whether it is on the role of international institutions, the rules governing international trade or the doctrines which under-gird responses to humanitarian crises. An emerging Beijing Consensus is not premised on the rise of the ‘East’ and decline of the ‘West’, as sometimes seemed to be the sub-text of the earlier Asian values debate. I do not share the triumphalism of my friends Kishore Mahbubani and Tommy Koh. However, like the Asian values debate, this new debate reflects alternative philosophical traditions. The issue is the appropriate balance between the rights of the individual and those of the state. This debate will highlight the shared identity and shared values between China and the states in the region. I do not agree with those in the US who argue that Sino-US competition will result in “intense security competition with considerable potential for war” in which most of China’s neighbours “will join with the United States to contain China’s power.”[1] These shared values are likely to reduce the risk of conflict and result in regional pressure for an accommodation with China and the adoption of policies of engagement with China, rather than confrontation with an emerging China. China is increasingly economically inter-dependent, part of a network of over-lapping cooperative regional institutions. In Asia, the focus is on economic growth and facilitating China’s integration into regional and global affairs. An interesting feature is that in China’s interactions with states in the region, China is beginning to be interested in issues of proper governance, the development of domestic institutions and the strengthening of regional institutional mechanisms. Chinese policy is not unchanging, even on the issue of sovereignty. For example, there has been an evolution in Chinese thinking on the question of freedom of passage through the Straits of Malacca and Singapore. While China supported the claims of the littoral states to sovereign control over the Straits when the Law of the Sea Convention was concluded in 1982, China’s increasing dependence on imported oil shipped through the Straits has led to a shift in favour of burden-sharing, the recognition of the rights of user states and the need for cooperation between littoral states and user states. Engagement as part of global and regional institutions has resulted in revisions to China’s earlier advocacy of strict non-intervention and non-interference. Recent Chinese support for global initiatives in peace-keeping, disaster relief, counter-terrorism, nuclear non-proliferation and anti-drug trafficking, its lack of resort to the use of its veto as a permanent member of the UN Security Council and its active role within the World Trade Organisation participation in global institutions can be influential in shaping perceptions of a rising China. Beijing has greatly lowered the tone and rhetoric of its strategic competition with the United States, actions which have gone a long way toward reassuring the countries of Southeast Asia of China’s sincerity in pursuing a non-confrontational foreign and security strategy. Beijing’s approach is significant as most Southeast Asian states prefer not to have to choose between alignment with the US and alignment with China and have adopted ‘hedging’ strategies in their relationships with the two powers. Beijing now adopts a more subtle approach towards the United States: not directly challenging US leadership in Asia, partnering with Washington where the two countries have shared interests, and, above all, promoting multilateral security processes that, in turn, constrain US power, influence and hegemony in the Asia-Pacific. The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is certainly in the midst of perhaps the most ambitious upgrading of its combat capabilities since the early 1960s, and it is adding both quantitatively and qualitatively to its arsenal of military equipment. Its current national defence doctrine is centered on the ability to fight “Limited Local Wars”. PLA operations emphasize preemption, surprise, and shock value, given that the earliest stages of conflict may be crucial to the outcome of a war. The PLA has increasingly pursued the acquisition of weapons for asymmetric warfare. The PLA mimics the United States in terms of the ambition and scope of its transformational efforts – and therefore challenges the U.S. military at its own game. Nevertheless, we should note that China, despite a “deliberate and focused course of military modernization,” is still at least two decades behind the United States in terms of defence capabilities and technology. There is very little evidence that the Chinese military is engaged in an RMA-like overhaul of its organizational or institutional structures. While the Chinese military is certainly acquiring new and better equipment, its RMA-related activities are embryonic and equipment upgrades by themselves do not constitute an RMA. China’s current military buildup is still more indicative of a process of evolutionary, steady-state, and sustaining – rather than disruptive or revolutionary – innovation and change. In conclusion, war in the Asia-Pacific is unlikely but the emergence of East Asia, especially China, will require adjustments by the West, just as Asian societies have had to adjust to Western norms and values during the American century. The challenge for liberal democracies like the United States will be to embark on a course of self-restraint.
Although WMD technologies are well understood, there have been few examples of their use by terrorists. The reason is simple: Conventional technologies such as nail bombs and explosives are easier, cheaper, and can even be more lethal. The sophisticated 1995 attack on the Tokyo subway with sarin killed 13 people, while the simpler 2005 explosives attack on the London subway killed 52 people.10
A third reason is the increasing ineffectiveness of drones in the face of an evolving terrorist threat. Despite the apparently significant impact of drone strikes on the core of al-Qaida, recent developments indicate that the terrorist network is learning to adapt to the threat of drones. French soldiers have found among the effects of a local jihadist leader in Mali a set of instructions on how to evade drone surveillance most effectively. Security experts assume that al-Qaida issued these instructions in order to enable their regional offshoots, based in areas of operations where the US is not yet carrying out drone missions, to protect themselves against such attacks. For al-Qaida, it makes sense to strengthen regional franchises in this way, since the organisation appears to be nearly leaderless at the operational level. However, the death of bin Laden was only symbolic in this respect: As President Obama rightly pointed out, there has been no major successful attack by al-Qaida in the US since 2001. Globally, the remaining members of its leadership must be content with playing a secondary role in the worldwide jihad. They have effectively ceded their claim to ideological and, notably, operational leadership to their regional branches, thus allowing these to raise their own profile with attacks on US interests in their immediate environment. The current threat in the US, but also in other Western countries therefore emanates not so much from terrorists travelling to the US to carry out an attack. The greater threat in the US is from “homegrown” terrorists who have been raised in the country. The attack on the Boston Marathon and the murder of a British soldier in London in May 2013 illustrate the new threat towards “neighbourhood targets”: Though smaller in their dimensions, such attacks can pose serious threats to societal harmony within the affected communities. Drones are of little use here. Paradoxically, it may therefore be the case that the success of drones in decimating al-Qaida will ultimately make it more difficult to gather information about the current terrorist threat. The killing of terrorism suspects, mainly through the use of drones, has doubtless been an important instrument in the campaign against the core of al-Qaida in recent years. The three interdependent developments outlined above – the decreasing domestic latitude, the counterproductive negative perception of drones strikes that may serve as a recruitment instrument, and the evolution of the terrorist threat towards local threats – will likely cause a decline in the number of such US drone missions. Nevertheless, the US will continue its targeted assassinations of terrorism suspects, and drones will undoubtedly play a key role in the process.
The extent to which the Obama administration has targeted lower-ranked operatives is not without consequences. Many of these lower-ranked operatives are densely connected to local tribal and clan structures. Their deaths in drone strikes may lead those connected to them by family and tribal ties to seek revenge, thus swelling the ranks of Al-Qaeda and its affiliate groups. As David Kilcullen and Andrew Exum have argued, ‘every one of these dead noncombatants represents an alienated family, a new desire for revenge, and more recruits for a militant movement that has grown exponentially even as drone strikes have increased’.50 Moreover, the vast increase in the number of deaths of low-ranking operatives has deepened political resistance to the US programme in Pakistan, Yemen and other countries. For example, while Pakistani officials have supported and even celebrated drone strikes against high-ranking operatives such as Baitullah Mehsud, they have taken a dimmer view of CIA attempts to kill mere foot soldiers with similar strikes.51 Such strikes tend to generate more political pressure on the Pakistani government to oppose the US than strikes against well-known figures whose leadership in militant networks was indisputable. Pakistani opposition leader Imran Khan has pointed directly to the deaths of civilians and low-level operatives as the reason why, if elected to office, he would order the air force to shoot down US drones.52 A similar dynamic has occurred in Yemen, where US drone strikes have driven more civilians into the ranks of Al-Qaeda and strengthened local insurgent forces challenging the Yemeni government.53
Like any other weapon, armed drones can be tactically useful. But are they helping advance the strategic goals of U.S. counterterrorism? Although terrorism is a tactic, it can succeed only on the strategic level, by leveraging a shocking event for political gain. To be effective, counterterrorism must itself respond with a coherent strategy. The problem for Washington today is that its drone program has taken on a life of its own, to the point where tactics are driving strategy rather than the other way around. The main goals of U.S. counterterrorism are threefold: the strategic defeat of al Qaeda and groups affiliated with it, the containment of local conflicts so that they do not breed new enemies, and the preservation of the security of the American people. Drones do not serve all these goals. Although they can protect the American people from attacks in the short term, they are not helping to defeat al Qaeda, and they may be creating sworn enemies out of a sea of local insurgents. It would be a mistake to embrace killer drones as the centerpiece of U.S. counterterrorism. AL QAEDA'S RESILIENCE At least since 9/11, the United States has sought the end of al Qaeda -- not just to set it back tactically, as drones have surely done, but also to defeat the group completely. Terrorist organizations can meet their demise in a variety of ways, and the killing of their leaders is certainly one of them. Abu Sayyaf, an Islamist separatist group in the Philippines, lost its political focus, split into factions, and became a petty criminal organization after the army killed its leaders in 2006 and 2007. In other cases, however, including those of the Shining Path in Peru and Action Directe in France, the humiliating arrest of a leader has been more effective. By capturing a terrorist leader, countries can avoid creating a martyr, win access to a storehouse of intelligence, and discredit a popular cause. Despite the Obama administration's recent calls for limits on drone strikes, Washington is still using them to try to defeat al Qaeda by killing off its leadership. But the terrorist groups that have been destroyed through decapitation looked nothing like al Qaeda: they were hierarchically structured, characterized by a cult of personality, and less than ten years old, and they lacked a clear succession plan. Al Qaeda, by contrast, is a resilient, 25-year-old organization with a broad network of outposts. The group was never singularly dependent on Osama bin Laden's leadership, and it has proved adept at replacing dead operatives. Drones have inflicted real damage on the organization, of course. In Pakistan, the approximately 350 strikes since 2004 have cut the number of core al Qaeda members in the tribal areas by about 75 percent, to roughly 50-100, a powerful answer to the 2001 attacks they planned and orchestrated nearby. As al Qaeda's center of gravity has shifted away from Pakistan to Yemen and North Africa, drone strikes have followed the terrorists. In September 2011, Michael Vickers, the U.S. undersecretary of defense for intelligence, estimated that there were maybe four key al Qaeda leaders remaining in Pakistan and about ten or 20 leaders overall in Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen. Drones have also driven down the overall level of violence in the areas they have hit. The political scientists Patrick Johnston and Anoop Sarbahi recently found that drone strikes in northwestern Pakistan from 2007 to 2011 resulted in a decrease in the number and lethality of militant attacks in the tribal areas where they were conducted. Such strikes often lead militants simply to go somewhere else, but that can have value in and of itself. Indeed, the drone threat has forced al Qaeda operatives and their associates to change their behavior, keeping them preoccupied with survival and hindering their ability to move, plan operations, and carry them out. The fighters have proved remarkably adaptable: a document found left behind in February 2013 by Islamist fighters fleeing Mali detailed 22 tips for avoiding drone attacks, including using trees as cover, placing dolls and statues outside to mislead aerial intelligence, and covering vehicles with straw mats. Nonetheless, the prospect of living under the threat of instant death from above has made recruitment more difficult and kept operatives from establishing close ties to local civilians, who fear they might also be killed. But the benefits end there, and there are many reasons to believe that drone strikes are undermining Washington's goal of destroying al Qaeda. Targeted killings have not thwarted the group's ability to replace dead leaders with new ones. Nor have they undermined its propaganda efforts or recruitment. Even if al Qaeda has become less lethal and efficient, its public relations campaigns still allow it to reach potential supporters, threaten potential victims, and project strength. If al Qaeda's ability to perpetuate its message continues, then the killing of its members will not further the long-term goal of ending the group. Not only has al Qaeda's propaganda continued uninterrupted by the drone strikes; it has been significantly enhanced by them. As Sahab (The Clouds), the propaganda branch of al Qaeda, has been able to attract recruits and resources by broadcasting footage of drone strikes, portraying them as indiscriminate violence against Muslims. Al Qaeda uses the strikes that result in civilian deaths, and even those that don't, to frame Americans as immoral bullies who care less about ordinary people than al Qaeda does. And As Sahab regularly casts the leaders who are killed by drones as martyrs. It is easy enough to kill an individual terrorist with a drone strike, but the organization's Internet presence lives on. A more effective way of defeating al Qaeda would be to publicly discredit it with a political strategy aimed at dividing its followers. Al Qaeda and its various affiliates do not together make up a strong, unified organization. Different factions within the movement disagree about both long-term objectives and short-term tactics, including whether it is acceptable to carry out suicide attacks or kill other Muslims. And it is in Muslim-majority countries where jihadist violence has taken its worst toll. Around 85 percent of those killed by al Qaeda's attacks have been Muslims, a fact that breeds revulsion among its potential followers. The United States should be capitalizing on this backlash. In reality, there is no equivalence between al Qaeda's violence and U.S. drone strikes -- under the Obama administration, drones have avoided civilians about 86 percent of the time, whereas al Qaeda purposefully targets them. But the foolish secrecy of Washington's drone program lets critics allege that the strikes are deadlier and less discriminating than they really are. Whatever the truth is, the United States is losing the war of perceptions, a key part of any counterterrorism campaign. Since 2010, moreover, U.S. drone strikes have progressed well beyond decapitation, now targeting al Qaeda leaders and followers alike, as well as a range of Taliban members and Yemeni insurgents. With its so-called signature strikes, Washington often goes after people whose identity it does not know but who appear to be behaving like militants in insurgent-controlled areas. The strikes end up killing enemies of the Pakistani, Somali, and Yemeni militaries who may not threaten the United States at all. Worse, because the targets of such strikes are so loosely defined, it seems inevitable that they will kill some civilians. The June 2011 claim by John Brennan, President Barack Obama's top counterterrorism adviser at the time, that there had not been a single collateral death from drone attacks in the previous year strained credulity -- and badly undermined U.S. credibility. The drone campaign has morphed, in effect, into remote-control repression: the direct application of brute force by a state, rather than an attempt to deal a pivotal blow to a movement. Repression wiped out terrorist groups in Argentina, Brazil, Peru, and tsarist Russia, but in each case, it sharply eroded the government's legitimacy. Repression is costly, not just to the victims, and difficult for democracies to sustain over time. It works best in places where group members can be easily separated from the general population, which is not the case for most targets of U.S. drone strikes. Military repression also often results in violence spreading to neighboring countries or regions, which partially explains the expanding al Qaeda footprint in the Middle East and North Africa, not to mention the Caucasus. KEEPING LOCAL CONFLICTS LOCAL Short of defeating al Qaeda altogether, a top strategic objective of U.S. counterterrorism should be to prevent fighters in local conflicts abroad from aligning with the movement and targeting the United States and its allies. Military strategists refer to this goal as "the conservation of enemies," the attempt to keep the number of adversaries to a minimum. Violent jihadism existed long before 9/11 and will endure long after the U.S. war on terrorism finally ends. The best way for the United States to prevent future acts of international terrorism on its soil is to make sure that local insurgencies remain local, to shore up its allies' capacities, and to use short-term interventions such as drones rarely, selectively, transparently, and only against those who can realistically target the United States. The problem is that the United States can conceivably justify an attack on any individual or group with some plausible link to al Qaeda. Washington would like to disrupt any potentially powerful militant network, but it risks turning relatively harmless local jihadist groups into stronger organizations with eager new recruits. If al Qaeda is indeed becoming a vast collective of local and regional insurgents, the United States should let those directly involved in the conflicts determine the outcome, keep itself out, provide resources only to offset funds provided to radical factions, and concentrate on protecting the homeland. Following 9/11, the U.S. war on terrorism was framed in the congressional authorization to use force as a response to "those nations, organizations, or persons" responsible for the attacks. The name "al Qaeda," which does not appear in the authorization, has since become an ill-defined shorthand, loosely employed by terrorist leaders, counterterrorism officials, and Western pundits alike to describe a shifting movement. The vagueness of the U.S. terminology at the time was partly deliberate: the authorization was worded to sidestep the long-standing problem of terrorist groups' changing their names to evade U.S. sanctions. But Washington now finds itself in a permanent battle with an amorphous and geographically dispersed foe, one with an increasingly marginal connection to the original 9/11 plotters. In this endless contest, the United States risks multiplying its enemies and heightening their incentives to attack the country.
The use of drones in Yemen might seem a simple, quick-fix option for Obama. But with every civilian death, al Qaeda's recruiting power increases. Nabeel Khoury, former U.S. Deputy Chief of Mission to Yemen, recently reminded us of just that. Asked whether the covert U.S. drone war in Yemen was creating more enemies than it removed, he concluded: "Drone strikes take out a few bad guys to be sure, but they also kill a large number of innocent civilians. Given Yemen's tribal structure, the U.S. generates roughly forty to sixty new enemies for every AQAP operative killed by drones."¶ Let me be clear: I, like the vast majority of my countrymen, reject terrorism. All of us were repulsed by footage of the gruesome al Qaeda attack on a Defence Ministry hospital that left dozens dead in December. We agree that our fight against extremist groups cannot be won without a variety of efforts, including robust law enforcement. But U.S. drone strikes are exacerbating our problem by leaving families bereaved and entire villages terrified. Drones destroy the fabric of Yemeni society. Wronged and angry men are just the sort extreme groups like al Qaeda in the Arab Peninsula find easiest to recruit.
Cycle of violence Our research team also traveled to a village in the area of Qaifah, Yemen on May 26, 2013. This area is one that has been targeted the most by drone strikes. While we were there, we heard a number of men who were relatives of the civilian victims of a drone strike loudly discussing whether they should kidnap us to pressure the U.S. government to look into the cases of Yemeni drone strike victims. The group that had this idea was trying to convince the rest of the men that we were working for an American organization, the Open Society Foundations, and that this organization could pressure the U.S. government to look into cases of Yemeni drone strike victims. We were lucky that one of the village men, who was also our guide in the area, told the others that he could not allow them to kidnap us because we were his guests and under his protection. Ultimately, we were able to leave the area without any problems. The incident, however, shows how the families of the victims, many of whom are poor farmers who have waited so long for an acknowledgment for the harm they suffered, and for justice through legal means, begin to consider violent “solutions” to their problems. The U.S. government should realize that Yemenis on the ground feel that U.S. practices that ignore civilian harm are not only dehumanizing but are also counter-productive to the United States’ long-term counterterrorism objectives. Acknowledgment of accidental civilian deaths can be a vital step toward preventing further acts of violence. I’ve seen some cases where the relatives of civilian drone strike victims are first convinced that the attack was a mistake, that the United States and its Yemeni government ally will officially apologize for the attack, and provide the victims with justice and a remedy. When this apology and remedy does not come, the relatives work to draw attention to their case to highlight that their relatives are civilian victims. And when there is no reaction or response from the U.S. government after those attempts, the families are left only with thoughts of revenge. In these moments, Al Qaeda and similar jihadist groups stand ready to capitalize and exploit these feelings of discontent and injustice. The potential for violent groups to take advantage of civilian discontent has only grown in recent years. Since the start of the current conflict involving the sectarian Houthi group on one side, and the Saudi-led coalition supported by its international partners on the other, Yemen has been torn apart and its institutions almost completely destroyed. This environment has made it easier for jihadist groups to prosper. The war has allowed Al Qaeda to come out of isolation and expand, so it is now more present in areas that, as the crisis in Yemen drags on, will become more friendly to such groups—not least if the United States continues raining down drone strikes and launching lethal raids on the people of Yemen. We are fortunate that, in the different areas in which we have worked, it was clear to us that many people, for now, reject Al Qaeda and jihadist groups, even as they are outraged that drone strikes killed their civilian relatives. This has limited Al Qaeda’s influence in Yemen. But every time the U.S. fails to acknowledge a drone strike that harms civilians, the risk that people will turn to Al Qaeda only grows.
The Obama Administration has dramatically escalated targeted killing by drones as a central feature of its counterterrorism response. Over the past two years, the administration has begun to reveal more about the targeted killing program, including in a leaked Department of Justice White paper on targeted killing1 and in public remarks by several senior officials.2 While this information is welcome, it does not fully address our concerns. Experts and other governments have continued to raise serious concerns about:  The precedent that the U.S. targeted killing policy is setting for the rest of the world, including countries that have acquired or are in the process of acquiring drones, yet have long failed to adhere to the rule of law and protect human rights;  The impact of the drone program on other U.S. counterterrorism efforts, including whether U.S. allies and other security partners have reduced intelligence-sharing and other forms of counterterrorism cooperation because of the operational and legal concerns expressed by these countries;  The impact of drone operations on other aspects of U.S. counterterrorism strategy, especially diplomatic and foreign assistance efforts designed to counter extremism, promote stability and provide economic aid;  The number of civilian casualties, including a lack of clarity on who the United States considers a civilian in these situations; and  Whether the legal framework for the program that has been publicly asserted so far by the administration comports with international legal requirements. The totality of these concerns, heightened by the lack of public information surrounding the program, require the administration to better explain the program and its legal basis, and to carefully review the policy in light of the global precedent it is setting and serious questions about the effectiveness of the program on the full range of U.S. counterterrorism efforts. While it is expected that elements of the U.S. government’s strategy for targeted killing will be classified, it is in the national interest that the government be more transparent about policy considerations governing its use as well as its legal justification, and that the program be subject to regular oversight. Furthermore, it is in U.S. national security interests to ensure that the rules of engagement are clear and that the program minimizes any unintended negative consequences. How the U.S. operates and publicly explains its targeted killing program will have far-reaching consequences. The manufacture and sale of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) is an increasingly global industry and drone technology is not prohibitively complicated. Some 70 countries already possess UAVs3 —including Russia, Syria and Libya4 —and others are in the process of acquiring them. As White House counterterrorism chief John Brennan stated: the United States is "establishing precedents that other nations may follow, and not all of them will be nations that share our interests or the premium we put on protecting human life, including innocent civilians."5 By declaring that it is in an armed conflict with al Qaeda’s “associated forces” (a term it has not defined) without articulating limits to that armed conflict, the United States is inviting other countries to similarly declare armed conflicts against groups they consider to be security threats for purposes of assuming lethal targeting authority. Moreover, by announcing that all “members” of such groups are legally targetable, the United States is establishing exceedingly broad precedent for who can be targeted, even if it is not utilizing the full scope of this claimed authority.6 As an alternative to armed conflict-based targeting, U.S. officials have claimed targeted killings are justified as self-defense responding to an imminent threat, but have referred to a “flexible” or “elongated” concept of imminence,7 without adequately explaining what that means or how that complies with the requirements of international law. In a white paper leaked to NBC news in February 2013, for example, the Department of Justice adopts what it calls a “broader concept of imminence” that has no basis in law. According to the white paper, an imminent threat need be neither immediate nor specific. This is a dangerous, unprecedented and unwarranted expansion of widely-accepted understandings of international law.8 It is also not clear that the current broad targeted killing policy serves U.S. long-term strategic interests in combating international terrorism. Although it has been reported that some high-level operational leaders of al Qaeda have been killed in drone attacks, studies show that the vast majority of victims are not high-level terrorist leaders.9 National security analysts and former U.S. military officials increasingly argue that such tactical gains are outweighed by the substantial costs of the targeted killing program, including growing antiAmerican sentiment and recruiting support for al Qaeda. 10 General Stanley McChrystal has said: “What scares me about drone strikes is how they are perceived around the world. The resentment created by American use of unmanned strikes ... is much greater than the average American appreciates.”11 The broad targeted killing program has already strained U.S. relations with its allies and thereby impeded the flow of critical intelligence about terrorist operations.12
In his article “Old Allies and New Friends: Intelligence-Sharing in the War on Terror”, Derek Reveron states “the war on terror requires high levels of intelligence to identify a threat relative to the amount of force required to neutralize it” as opposed to the Cold War where the opposite was true (455). As a result, intelligence is the cornerstone of effective counterterrorism operations in the post 9/11 world. Though the United States has the most robust intelligence community in the world with immense capability, skills, and technology, its efficiency in counterterrorism issues depends on coalitions of both traditional allies and new allies. Traditional allies offer a certain degree of dependability through a tried and tested relationship based on similar values; however, newly cultivated allies in the war on terrorism offer invaluable insight into groups operating in their own back yard. The US can not act unilaterally in the global fight against terrorism. It doesn’t have the resources to monitor every potential terrorist hide-out nor does it have the time or capability to cultivate the cultural, linguistic, and CT knowledge that its new allies have readily available. The Department of Defense’s 2005 Quadrennial Review clearly states that the United States "cannot meet today's complex challenges alone. Success requires unified statecraft: the ability of the U.S. government to bring to, bear all elements of national power at home and to work in close cooperation with allies and partners abroad" (qtd in Reveron, 467). The importance of coalition building for the war on terrorism is not lost on US decision-makers as seen by efforts made in the post 9/11 climate to strengthen old relationships and build new ones; however, as seen in the following sections, the possible hindrances to effective, long term CT alliances must also be addressed in order to sustain current operations.
The second major claim for the effectiveness of drone strikes is based on their ability to kill HVTs, defined as key operational and political leaders of Al-Qaeda and related groups. From the campaign trail to his time in office, President Obama has consistently maintained that he would not hesitate to use lethal force to remove leading figures in Al-Qaeda.44 Yet the actual record of drone strikes suggests that forces under his command have killed far more lower-ranked operatives associated with other Islamist movements and civilians than HVTs from Al-Qaeda. Peter Bergen has estimated that the drone strikes have killed 49 high-ranking ‘militant’ leaders since 2004, only 2 per cent of the total number of deaths from drone strikes.45 The remaining 98 per cent of drone strikes have been directed against lower-ranking operatives, only some of whom are engaged in direct hostilities against the United States, and civilians. Many of these actors pose no direct or imminent threats, but rather speculative ones, such as individuals who might some day attack the US or its interests abroad.46 Even as President Obama has increased the number of drone strikes, the number of HVTs killed has ‘slipped or barely increased’.47 In 2010, a mid-ranking Haqqani network fighter concluded that ‘it seems they really want to kill everyone, not just the leaders’.48 The decision to expand targeted killing to this scale and take aim at even low-ranking ‘foot soldiers’ is unprecedented and sets the Obama administration’s drone programme apart in both scale and character from targeted killing operations elsewhere.49
Since the United States carried out the first lethal drone strike, in Afghanistan in October 2001, drones have emerged from obscurity to become the most contentious aspect of modern warfare. Armed drones or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are now the United States’ weapons platform of choice in its military campaign against the dispersed terrorist network of al-Qaeda. They offer an unprecedented ability to track and kill individuals with great precision, without any risk to the lives of the forces that use them, and at a much lower cost than traditional manned aircraft. But although the military appeal of remotely piloted UAVs is self-evident, they have also attracted enormous controversy and public concern. In particular, the regular use of drones to kill people who are located far from any zone of conventional hostilities strikes many people as a disturbing development that threatens to undermine the international rule of law.
A growing chasm in operational practice is opening up between the United States and its allies in NATO. This rift is putting the Atlantic alliance at risk. Yet no one in Washington seems to be paying attention. The escalating use of unmanned aerial vehicles to strike terrorist suspects in an increasing number of operational environments from the Arabian Peninsula to Southeast Asia, coupled with the continued use of military commissions and indefinite detention, is driving a wedge between the United States and its allies. Attitudes across the Atlantic are hardening fast. This isn’t knee-jerk, man-on-the-street anti-Americanism. European governments that have tried to turn a blind eye to U.S. counterterrorism practices over the past decade are now forced to pay attention by their own courts, which will restrict cooperation in the future. As recently as last month, the German federal prosecutor’s office opened a probe into the October 2010 killing of a German national identified only as “Buenyamin E.” in a U.S. drone strike in Pakistan. There are at least four other similar cases involving German nationals and several reported strikes involving legal residents of the United Kingdom. In March, Polish prosecutors charged the former head of Polish intelligence, Zbigniew Siemiatkowski, with “unlawfully depriving prisoners of the their liberty” because of the alleged role he played in helping to establish a CIA secret prison in northeastern Poland in 2002–2003. Last December, British Special Forces ran afoul of the UK courts for informally transferring two Al Qaeda suspects detained in Iraq, Yunus Rahmatullah and Amanatullah Ali, to U.S. forces. The British government has been instructed to recover the men from U.S. custody or face legal sanctions that could result in two senior ministers being sent to prison. Perhaps the most dramatic example illustrating the gap that has opened up between the United States and its European allies concerns the 2009 in absentia conviction of twenty-three U.S. agents in an Italian court for the role they played in the extraordinary rendition of radical Imam Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr from Milan to Cairo. Britain, Poland, Italy and Germany are among America’s closest military partners. Troops from all four countries are currently serving alongside U.S. forces in Afghanistan, but they are now operating within a very different set of constraints than their U.S. counterparts. The European Court of Human Rights established its jurisdiction over stabilization operations in Iraq, and by implication its writ extends to Afghanistan as well. The British government has lost a series of cases before the court relating to its operations in southern Iraq. This means that concepts such as the right to life, protection from arbitrary punishment, remedy and due process apply in areas under the effective control of European forces. Furthermore, the possibility that intelligence provided by any of America’s European allies could be used to target a terrorism suspect in Somalia or the Philippines for a lethal drone strike now raises serious criminal liability issues for the Europeans. The United States conducts such operations under the legal theory that it is in an international armed conflict with Al Qaeda and its affiliates that can be pursued anywhere on the globe where armed force may be required. But not one other member of NATO shares this legal analysis, which flies in the face of established international legal norms. The United States may have taken issue with the traditional idea that wars are fought between states and not between states and criminal gangs, but its allies have not. The heads of Britain’s foreign and domestic intelligence services have been surprisingly open about the “inhibitions” that this growing divergence has caused the transatlantic special relationship, telling Parliament that it has become an obstacle to intelligence sharing. European attitudes are not going to change—the European Court of Human Rights is now deeply embedded in European life, and individual European governments cannot escape its oversight no matter how well disposed they are to assist the United States. The United States has bet heavily on the efficacy of a new array of counterterrorism powers as the answer to Al Qaeda. In doing so it has evolved a concept of operations that has much more in common with the approach to terrorist threats taken by Israel and Russia than by its European partners. There has been little consideration of the wider strategic cost of these tactics, even as the Obama administration doubles down and extends their use. Meanwhile, some of America’s oldest and closest allies are beginning to place more and more constraints on working with U.S. forces. NATO cannot conduct military operations under two competing legal regimes for long. Something has to give—and it may just be the Atlantic alliance.
The choice the United States faces is not between unfettered drone use and sacrificing freedom of action, but between drone policy reforms by design or drone policy reforms by default. Recent history demonstrates that domestic political pressure could severely limit drone strikes in ways that the CIA or JSOC have not anticipated. In support of its counterterrorism strategy, the Bush administration engaged in the extraordinary rendition of terrorist suspects to third countries, the use of enhanced interrogation techniques, and warrantless wiretapping. Although the Bush administration defended its policies as critical to protecting the U.S. homeland against terrorist attacks, unprecedented domestic political pressure led to significant reforms or termination. Compared to Bush-era counterterrorism policies, drone strikes are vulnerable to similar—albeit still largely untapped—moral outrage, and they are even more susceptible to political constraints because they occur in plain sight. Indeed, a negative trend in U.S. public opinion on drones is already apparent. Between February and June 2012, U.S. support for drone strikes against suspected terrorists fell from 83 percent to 62 percent—which represents less U.S. support than enhanced interrogation techniques maintained in the mid-2000s.65 Finally, U.S. drone strikes are also widely opposed by the citizens of important allies, emerging powers, and the local populations in states where strikes occur.66 States polled reveal overwhelming opposition to U.S. drone strikes: Greece (90 percent), Egypt (89 percent), Turkey (81 percent), Spain (76 percent), Brazil (76 percent), Japan (75 percent), and Pakistan (83 percent).67 ¶ This is significant because the United States cannot conduct drone strikes in the most critical corners of the world by itself. Drone strikes require the tacit or overt support of host states or neighbors. If such states decided not to cooperate—or to actively resist—U.S. drone strikes, their effectiveness would be immediately and sharply reduced, and the likelihood of civilian casualties would increase. This danger is not hypothetical. In 2007, the Ethiopian government terminated its U.S. military presence after public revelations that U.S. AC-130 gunships were launching attacks from Ethiopia into Somalia. Similarly, in late 2011, Pakistan evicted all U.S. military and intelligence drones, forcing the United States to completely rely on Afghanistan to serve as a staging ground for drone strikes in Pakistan. The United States could attempt to lessen the need for tacit host-state support by making significant investments in armed drones that can be flown off U.S. Navy ships, conducting electronic warfare or missile attacks on air defenses, allowing downed drones to not be recovered and potentially transferred to China or Russia, and losing access to the human intelligence networks on the ground that are critical for identifying targets.¶ According to U.S. diplomats and military officials, active resistance— such as the Pakistani army shooting down U.S. armed drones— is a legitimate concern. In this case, the United States would need to either end drone sorties or escalate U.S. military involvement by attacking Pakistani radar and antiaircraft sites, thus increasing the likelihood of civilian casualties.68 Beyond where drone strikes currently take place, political pressure could severely limit options for new U.S. drone bases. For example, the Obama administration is debating deploying armed drones to attack al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) in North Africa, which would likely require access to a new airbase in the region. To some extent, anger at U.S. sovereignty violations is an inevitable and necessary trade-off when conducting drone strikes. Nevertheless, in each of these cases, domestic anger would partially or fully abate if the United States modified its drone policy in the ways suggested below.
However, there is of course no guarantee that things will remain that way, and the 9/11 attacks inspired the remarkable extrapolation that, because the terrorists were successful with box cutters, they might soon be able to turn out weapons of mass destruction— particularly nuclear ones—and then detonate them in an American city. For example, in his influential 2004 book, Nuclear Terrorism, Harvard’s Graham Allison relayed his “considered judgment” that “on the current path, a nuclear terrorist attack on America in the decade ahead is more likely than not.”11 Allison has had a great deal of company in his alarming pronouncements. In 2007, the distinguished physicist Richard Garwin put the likelihood of a nuclear explosion on an American or European city by terrorist or other means at 20 percent per year, which would work out to 91 percent over the eleven-year period to 2018.12
Today, large scale production, storage, protection and field testing of weaponized bacteria or viruses are beyond the abilities of a small group or a terrorist cell. However, a number of countries in the world have demonstrated the ability – and the will – to unleash horrific attacks upon their perceived enemies. They undoubtedly are following the current advances in gene manipulation technology with great interest. For now though, such advances in gene manipulation, while making the process faster, simpler and more accessible, are still quite a challenge to carry out.
The risk of an accidental release of H5N1 is similar to that of other infectious pathogens currently being studied. Proper safety standards are key, of course, and experts in the field have had a year to determine the best way to proceed, balancing safety and research benefits. Previous work with the virus was conducted at biosafety level three out of four, which requires researchers wearing respirators and disposable gowns to work in pairs in a negative pressure environment. While many of these labs are part of universities, access is controlled either through keyed entry or even palm scanners. There are roughly 40 labs that submitted to the voluntary ban. Those wishing to resume work after the ban was lifted must comply with guidelines requiring strict national oversight and close communication and collaboration with national authorities. The risk of release either through accident or theft cannot be completely eliminated, but given the established parameters the risk is minimal. The use of the pathogen as a biological weapon requires an assessment of whether a non-state actor would have the capabilities to isolate the virulent strain, then weaponize and distribute it. Stratfor has long held the position that while terrorist organizations may have rudimentary capabilities regarding biological weapons, the likelihood of a successful attack is very low. Given that the laboratory version of H5N1 -- or any influenza virus, for that matter -- is a contagious pathogen, there would be two possible modes that a non-state actor would have to instigate an attack. The virus could be refined and then aerosolized and released into a populated area, or an individual could be infected with the virus and sent to freely circulate within a population. There are severe constraints that make success using either of these methods unlikely. The technology needed to refine and aerosolize a pathogen for a biological attack is beyond the capability of most non-state actors. Even if they were able to develop a weapon, other factors such as wind patterns and humidity can render an attack ineffective. Using a human carrier is a less expensive method, but it requires that the biological agent be a contagion. Additionally, in order to infect the large number of people necessary to start an outbreak, the infected carrier must be mobile while contagious, something that is doubtful with a serious disease like small pox. The carrier also cannot be visibly ill because that would limit the necessary human contact.
The escalation of drone strikes in Pakistan to its current tempo—one every few days—directly contradicts the long-term American strategic goal of boosting the capacity and legitimacy of the government in Islamabad. Drone attacks are more than just temporary incidents that erase all traces of an enemy. They have lasting political effects that can weaken existing governments, undermine their legitimacy and add to the ranks of their enemies. These political effects come about because drones provide a powerful signal to the population of a targeted state that the perpetrator considers the sovereignty of their government to be negligible. The popular perception that a government is powerless to stop drone attacks on its territory can be crippling to the incumbent regime, and can embolden its domestic rivals to challenge it through violence. Such continual violations of the territorial integrity of a state also have direct consequences for the legitimacy of its government. Following a meeting with General David Petraeus, Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari described the political costs of drones succinctly, saying that ‘continuing drone attacks on our country, which result in loss of precious lives or property, are counterproductive and difficult to explain by a democratically elected government. It is creating a credibility gap.’75 Similarly, the Pakistani High Commissioner to London Wajid Shamsul Hasan said in August 2012 that¶ what has been the whole outcome of these drone attacks is that you have directly or indirectly contributed to destabilizing or undermining the democratic government. Because people really make fun of the democratic government—when you pass a resolution against drone attacks in the parliament and nothing happens. The Americans don’t listen to you, and they continue to violate your territory.76¶ The appearance of powerlessness in the face of drones is corrosive to the appearance of competence and legitimacy of the Pakistani government. The growing perception that the Pakistani civilian government is unable to stop drone attacks is particularly dangerous in a context where 87 per cent of all Pakistanis are dissatisfied with the direction of the country and where the military, which has launched coups before, remains a popular force.77
The failed Times Square bombing marked the first arrival of blowback from President Obama’s embrace of a drones-first counterterrorism policy on American soil. There is no reason to believe it will be the last. When President Obama came into office, he pledged to end the ‘war on terror’ and to restore respect for the rule of law to America’s counterterrorism policies. Instead, he has been just as ruthless and indifferent to the rule of law as his predecessor. The basic dimensions of American counterterrorism policy have barely changed between the two administrations, though there has been a shift in tone and emphasis.5 While President Bush issued a call to arms to defend ‘civilization’ against the threat of terrorism, President Obama has waged his war on terror in the shadows, using drone strikes, special operations and sophisticated surveillance to fight a brutal covert war against Al-Qaeda and other Islamist networks. The Obama approach, which emphasizes relatively few ‘boots on the ground’ and avoids nation-building missions, has been described by members of his administration as efficient, and even morally necessary, given the state of the US economy and the war-weariness of the American people.6 Among the most distinctive elements of the Obama approach has been an embrace of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or drones. During his first term, President Obama launched more than six times as many drone strikes as President Bush did throughout his eight years in office, all the while keeping the CIA-run drone programme away from the scrutiny of Congress and the courts.7 The US is now using drone strikes to kill terrorist suspects in at least four states (Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia), although drone strikes are rumoured to have been used in other places.8 The campaigns in Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia are run by the CIA, with little congressional oversight, and their existence has even been denied by the Obama administration in the courts.9 Most Americans remain unaware of the scale of the drone programme operating in these countries and of the destruction it has caused in their name.
In the U.S. military planning process, the need to develop, test, and finish operational plans in a timely manner requires — in the absence of clarifying information — making assumptions. What’s an “assumption,” then? Well, the military defines it as: “A supposition on the current situation or a presupposition on the future course of events, either or both assumed to be true in the absence of positive proof, necessary to enable the commander in the process of planning to complete an estimate of the situation and make a decision.” This refers to temporary gaps in knowledge that intelligence analysts will (hopefully) fill in and validate before the operation commences, such as overhead imagery maps of road and bridge networks or updated enemy force-structure estimates. Planners and commanders recognize the risks of relying on untested assumptions, but they nevertheless do so to provide sequenced guidance for forces in the field in an expeditious manner. I’m sure you’re shocked, shocked! to hear it, but assumptions are also present in U.S. officials’ and policymakers’ thinking about foreign-policy challenges. This is most apparent with the widely agreed-upon assumption underlying counterterrorism strategies over the past 13 years: Terrorists need safe havens to plan international terrorist attacks. This supposition is attractive because it whittles a complex problem set down to a clear mission that, not coincidentally, can be countered by U.S. intelligence and military capabilities. However, this simplifies a far more complex problem of terrorist violence, ignoring other factors that were overlooked prior to the 9/11 attacks, such as homeland-security intelligence collection and sharing discrepancies. Subsequently, this assumption has driven much U.S. foreign and military policy since 9/11, yet it remains wholly untested. The main lesson of 9/11, according to George W. Bush’s administration, was that it is necessary for terrorists to “have a safe haven to plan and launch attacks on America and other civilized nations.” This thinking was similarly adopted by Barack Obama’s administration in its 2010 National Security Strategy: “We will disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qa’ida and its affiliates through a comprehensive strategy that denies them safe haven.” And in September 2014, Obama highlighted its prevalence when he articulated the “core principle” of his presidency: “If you threaten America, you will find no safe haven.” The need to destroy safe havens — defined by the U.S. State Department as an “area of relative security exploited by terrorists to indoctrinate, recruit, coalesce, train, and regroup, as well as prepare and support their operations” — was the premise for the war in Afghanistan and for the expansion of drone operations into Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia. Most recently, it has underlined the rationale for initiating an open-ended war to degrade and destroy the Islamic State. Although Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson has emphasized since September that the Islamic State poses no credible threat to the U.S. homeland, policymakers continue to conflate the group’s relative safe haven with its ability to conduct international attacks. Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel claimed, “These fighters can exploit [the Islamic State’s] safe haven to plan, coordinate, and carry out attacks against the United States and Europe.” Similarly, Nicholas Rasmussen, now director of the National Counterterrorism Center, contended that a safe haven would allow the Islamic State “to bring additional Western potential operatives into Iraq or Syria, into that safe haven, and potentially train, equip, and deploy them back out to Europe and the United States.” Given that the United States is over 13 years into this campaign and that the size of foreign terrorist organizations that the United States is at war with has grown or stayed the same size, it is well past time to test the truth and wisdom behind the safe-haven assumption. Spoiler alert: The support for its universal acceptance simply is not there. An overreliance on the myth of 9/11 It is an accepted fact in Washington that the lesson of 9/11 is that the relative safety that Osama bin Laden and his senior aides enjoyed in southern Afghanistan resulted in the attacks on the Twin Towers and Pentagon. However, this limited understanding ignores other facts that are just as important, if not more relevant today. Among the forgotten reasons that the catastrophic terrorism was able to occur were glaring deficiencies in U.S. homeland and intelligence policies. For example, the 9/11 hijackers passed undetected through border security 68 times and operated freely in nine states. According to the 9/11 Commission’s report, policies and misunderstanding “blocked the arteries of information sharing” between the CIA and FBI, a consequence of which was that the FBI was not informed by the CIA that it was watching one of the hijackers who had a visa. Commercial aviation security was abysmal: The Office of Special Counsel’s investigation into a whistleblower suit filed by Bogdan Dzakovic, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) red-team leader, found that FAA officials ignored and “grossly mismanaged” the red team and the many security lapses it uncovered before 9/11. This negligence made America needlessly vulnerable, and these shortcomings have all been addressed to varying degrees through new legislation, funding, and a massive expansion of America’s homeland-security and intelligence infrastructure. As Stanford University professor Amy Zegart determined through her careful reading of pre-9/11 government documents, the CIA and FBI collectively missed 23 opportunities to potentially disrupt the 9/11 plot. Although the loopholes al Qaeda utilized are now far less susceptible to such exploitation, policymakers continue to rely on the safe-haven assumption when the causation, sources, and enabling factors of post-9/11 international terrorism portray a vastly more different and complex problem. Core al Qaeda — the ultimate perpetrators of 9/11 — has not conducted another attack against the homeland. More broadly, it is overlooked that other terrorist groups based in safe havens have accounted for only 1 percent of terrorist attacks against the U.S. homeland. Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan and al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula claimed responsibility for just two out of more than 200 attacks, neither of which resulted in any deaths. And only six of 60 publicly documented, uncovered plots by international terrorist organizations against the United States since 9/11 were directly linked to al Qaeda — either operatives communicated with or the plot was orchestrated by senior leadership. Of course, the threat to Americans is different where such post-9/11 security protections are not in place — particularly in safe-haven countries. However, according to the State Department and Global Terrorism Database, of the 335 Americans who have died from terrorism since 9/11, 268, or 80 percent, died within Iraq or Afghanistan — the very places where the United States started wars to prevent or destroy safe havens. It’s tragic but unsurprising that these contractors, development workers, and journalists operating bravely in war zones face severely heightened risks to their personal safety. Before Afghanistan became a combat zone, no Americans were killed by acts of terrorism in the country. In fact, in 2000, only 19 Americans were killed by international terrorism — 17 in the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen, 1 in West Timor, and 1 in Sierra Leone. Similarly, after the United States declared war on Iraq in 2003, deaths of Americans in the country multiplied by nearly eight times — increasing from eight to 63. The high rates of American deaths in Iraq and Afghanistan are less a result of a safe haven, which existed long before U.S. military operations, and more a result of combat. Comparatively, only 15 Americans have been killed while living or working in State Department-designated safe-haven countries — Yemen (4), Pakistan (3), Algeria (3), Lebanon (2), Indonesia (2), and Somalia (1) — while 35 Americans were killed elsewhere. The 13-year-long myth that 9/11 occurred exclusively because of the Afghan safe haven has constricted U.S. officials’ ability to subjectively evaluate the realities of international terrorist threats to Americans. Mischaracterized sources of terrorist threats The recent mass shooting at Charlie Hebdo magazine’s office in Paris and the alleged foiled plot against the U.S. Capitol by Ohio resident and apparent Islamic State-supporter Christopher Cornell expose a growing shift in the sources of terrorist threats against the West — away from al Qaeda operatives toward homegrown, or self-radicalized, lone wolves. In fact, the primary threat against the homeland emanates from within: Americans, themselves, have been responsible for 50 percent of plots and attacks against the United States since 9/11, followed by Brits at 21 percent. If anywhere is a safe haven for terrorism against the United States, it is America.If anywhere is a safe haven for terrorism against the United States, it is America. Moreover, when attempting the inherently difficult task of uncovering these lone wolves’ motivations, it turns out that the very U.S. wars and counterterrorism operations intended to deny terrorists a safe haven motivates Americans to become terrorists. Ali Muhammad Brown, accused of killing four men in Washington and New Jersey, described his murder of 19-year-old Brendan Tevlin as an act of “vengeance” for the U.S. military operations in the Middle East: “All these lives are taken every single day by America, by this government. So a life for a life.” In short, bombing them there makes it more likely that those here will resort to bombing. Although there have been four successful jihadi terrorist attacks in the United States since 9/11 — all homegrown — only 17 of the 51 Americans killed by terrorism in the United States died in those attacks. Despite the fact that none of the perpetrators sought training abroad in safe havens, policymakers have attempted to tie these homegrown threats to foreign sanctuaries. On Jan. 11, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder agreed with an interviewer who asked him whether the United States is in a phase of terrorism in which “these homegrown terrorists … go to other places, get training, then come back to their home country and carry out these attacks.” But this claim mischaracterizes the relationship between safe havens and homegrown threats. Of the 63 jihadi terrorist plots or attacks against the U.S. homeland between 9/11 and 2012, perpetrators of just eight of them traveled abroad to safe havens; the other two who went abroad traveled to Saudi Arabia and Canada. Intentionally overlooked forms of terrorism Some terroristic acts are not categorized by the United States as terrorism unless they are directly linked to a foreign terrorist organization, and they are therefore frequently excluded from policy discussions. Coincidentally, evidence that contradicts the safe-haven theory is overlooked. While the Islamic State’s beheading of American journalists James Foley and Steven Sotloff were undeniably considered acts of terrorism, Alton Nolen’s beheading of a co-worker and Isaiah Marin’s near beheading and murder of a college student, both in Oklahoma weeks later, were not considered as such.* Had the perpetrators been Muslim, it’s likely the term “terrorism” would have been used widely by media and law enforcement officials attempting to make a connection to terrorist organizations abroad. In another example, religious extremist Larry McQuilliams’s firing of more than 100 rounds at the Mexican Consulate, a U.S. courthouse, and police headquarters in Austin, Texas, was framed as “violent anti-government behavior” by the local police department. While the overseeing police chief described him as a “homegrown American extremist” and “terrorist,” the media refrained from categorizing it as terrorism. Other instances of domestic terrorism labeled by the FBI as “hate crimes” killed 84 Americans between 2002 and 2012: for example, Frazier Glenn Miller’s murder of a 14-year-old boy and his grandfather at a Jewish community center in April 2014 and Wade Michael Page’s rampage at a Sikh temple in Wisconsin that killed six.* Similarly, mass killings, defined as having four or more victims, are generally not categorized as terrorism by the federal government unless they are motivated by Islamic extremism. Since 2006, there have been more than 300 mass killings — including the 2012 mass shooting at an Aurora, Colorado, movie theater, and the 2013 Navy Yard shooting in Washington, D.C. And since 9/11, more than 112,000 Americans have been murdered with guns. The semantic difference between traditional domestic acts of terrorism — “hate crimes,” “mass murders,” or simply “murder” — and foreign-inspired acts of terrorism, by its very nature, leads the United States to look abroad for solutions to “terrorism.” The assumption that international terrorism against the United States requires a safe haven necessitates immediate and in-depth study. It’s easy to imagine a bearded plotter in a cave halfway around the world dreaming up dastardly plans to blow up the White House. But the causation of terrorist violence, its sources, and its enabling factors are far more complex than solely the existence of a safe haven — itself a relative concept often categorized as being a binary either-or. Not only has online coordination diminished the importance of safe havens to a terrorist organization’s ability to undertake international attacks, but evidence of the true threat of terrorism to Americans suggests that a hotel room in Hoboken can be just as much a safe haven as a hut in Helmand — and more dangerous too, given the proximity to American targets. Officials and policymakers have oversubscribed to the safe-haven assumption for too long and have developed policy responses accordingly — and the costs and consequences have been tremendous. Denying safe havens in Iraq and Afghanistan took nearly 7,000 American lives at an eventual estimated cost of $4 trillion to $6 trillion. These officials and policymakers overwhelmingly supported these military operations because they based them on a selective, and flawed, understanding of what factors enabled the terrorist attacks to occur on 9/11. Now, over five months into a war against the Islamic State that is rationalized on the premise of safe-haven denial, the United States is unquestionably pursuing the same costly policies that have achieved so little since then.
Civilian deaths have bred resentments on a local level, sometimes undermining U.S. efforts to turn the public against the militants. The backlash in Yemen is still not as large as in Pakistan, where there is heavy pressure on the government to force limits on strikes — but public calls for a halt to strikes are starting to emerge.¶ In May, President Obama promised to increase transparency on the drone strike program and enhance guidelines on their use. But the Bureau of Investigative Journalism found in November that the six months following Obama's speech actually saw an increase of drone strike casualties in Yemen and Pakistan. ¶ Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International reported in October that civilian casualties of drone strikes are higher than the U.S. admits. Around the same time, a U.N. human rights investigator said 400-600 of the 2,200 people killed by drones in the past decade were noncombatants. And in 2012, reports emerged that the Yemeni government works to help the U.S. hide it deadly errors. ¶ Data on drone strikes, like all counter-terrorism efforts, is necessarily shrouded in mystery, making it difficult to measure success. But if drone strikes continue to indiscriminately kill civilians, moderates in Yemen may be driven towards more extremist positions. Even governments working with Washington to coordinate the strikes could turn against the U.S. if drone casualties are not scaled back or eliminated.
The U.S. is by far the most prolific user of drones. Independent groups say more than 500 U.S. military and CIA drone strikes have killed about 3,800 militants, about 400 civilians, and at least eight Americans, in seven countries over the last decade. Most U.S. military drone exports are limited by the Missile Technology Control Regime, a 1987 international accord meant to limit the spread of ballistic missiles. The State Department agreed in February 2015 to relax those Cold War-era restrictions, although with a "strong presumption of denial." Each sale requires congressional approval under the foreign military sales program, and only two foreign sales have gone through in recent months. On Feb. 17, approval was granted to sell four unarmed Reapers, each equipped with sophisticated sensors and radars, to Spain. In November, the U.S. approved Italy's long-pending request to arm its two Reaper drones with Hellfire missiles and laser-guided bombs.
A bipartisan group of nearly two dozen House members is urging President Donald Trump to OK sales of high-tech armed drones to Jordan and the United Arab Emirates after the Obama administration nixed the move. In a letter obtained by CNN, the lawmakers argued that the two Arab countries are allies in the ISIS fight, and also made an economic pitch to Trump: Jordan and the UAE are turning to China instead to buy armed drones.
WASHINGTON ― The Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Tuesday advanced new restrictions on the president’s ability to use emergency authorities to sell arms without Congress’ approval. The bipartisan bill ― called the Saudi Arabia False Emergencies (SAFE) Act ― is a rebuke of President Donald Trump’s use of an emergency declaration to sell U.S. arms to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. It comes a week after the Senate’s historic passage of 22 measures aimed at blocking White House plans for $8.1 billion in military sales to the two nations. The House is expected to follow the Senate, though the two chambers are not expected to have enough votes to overturn a presidential veto. The bill’s sponsor, committee ranking member Sen. Robert Menendez, decried what a bipartisan group of lawmakers see as the administration’s misuse of the emergency provisions in the Arms Export Control Act. “In approving this legislation, the committee is taking another leap forward in creating further accountability against any abuses of this nature and standing up for congressional oversight,” said Menendez, D-N.J. The bill would restrict existing emergency authorities in the Arms Export Control Act to only be available for America’s closest security treaty allies and security partner countries ― NATO countries and Australia, Israel, Japan, South Korea and New Zealand. The authorities would only be available for arms and services that directly respond to or counter a physical threat, and 75 percent of which can be delivered within two months. The legislation also requires the president show Congress detailed justifications for individual arms sales. Under the Arms Export Control Act, Congress has 30 days to review a sale before it is finalized. The bill was co-sponsored by Democratic Sens. Patrick Leahy of Vermont and Chris Murphy of Connecticut, as well as Republican Sens. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Rand Paul of Kentucky. It was opposed by the committee’s chairman, Sen. Jim Risch, R-Idaho, which leaves the bill’s path to a Senate floor vote unclear. Lawmakers from both parties have opposed arms sales to Saudi Arabia over concerns about civilian casualties in the Saudi-led air campaign in Yemen as well as the death of Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi. Western intelligence agencies accuse the Saudi crown prince of ordering the killing of the journalist at a Saudi consulate in Turkey. “Chopping up U.S. residents and torturing others should not be rewarded,” Murphy said. "What the president is doing runs contrary to our Founding Fathers’ vision and we must exercise congressional oversight to ensure our actions abroad align with values at home — full stop.”
Lawmakers who are furious about President Trump’s decision to circumvent Congress and sell weapons to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf allies are now searching for a way to thwart the sale. Experts say legislative options exist despite Trump’s move to invoke emergency powers that waive a congressional review period for the deals. But any attempt to block the president faces an uphill battle in a divided Congress. Still, arms control advocates are hopeful the issue has ignited enough bipartisan outrage for lawmakers to take action. “Congress blocking an arms sale like this would be pretty much unprecedented, but given that both the House and Senate approved Yemen War Power Resolutions, including with the support of Republicans in both the House and Senate, I believe the chance of a blocking action is high,” Jeff Abramson, a senior fellow at the Arms Control Association, said in an email. Earlier this year Congress passed a war powers resolution to end U.S. military support for the Saudi-led coalition’s campaign in Yemen’s civil war. Trump vetoed the measure, and lawmakers fell short of the votes needed to override the veto. Sen. Bob Menendez (N.J.), the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, had legislative holds on arms sales to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) over concerns about civilian casualties in the Yemen war, where the Saudi coalition has been blamed for the majority of civilian deaths. Under normal procedures outlined in the Arms Export Control Act, lawmakers have 30 days to review and potentially block an arms sale once an administration formally notifies Congress about the pending action. But on Friday, the Trump administration notified Congress it was invoking a provision of the law that allows sales to go through immediately without a review period in cases deemed an emergency. The administration is using that emergency authority to push through 22 separate deals with the Saudis, Emiratis and Jordanians, with a total value of $8.1 billion. Notices for seven of the sales were posted on the Defense Security Cooperation Agency website Friday, while notices for the rest are expected to be published in the Federal Register. The Friday notices show the sales include surveillance aircraft support and maintenance of aircraft for the Saudis, as well as 20,004 precision-guided munitions kits, 331 anti-tank missiles and 20 drones for the Emirates. Lawmakers who oppose the move argue Trump is setting a dangerous precedent of invoking emergency authorities to avoid a vote in Congress, one they say he would not win. Even Republicans who are generally supportive of Trump were dismayed at his decision to push the arms sales. “I understand the administration’s frustration that key members of Congress held these arms sales for an extended period of time, in some cases for over a year,” Rep. Michael McCaul (R-Texas) said in a statement after Friday’s notification. “However, the president’s decision to use an emergency waiver on these sales is unfortunate and will damage certain future congressional interactions.” Despite the use of emergency powers, Congress could pass resolutions blocking the sales, Abramson said. “At any point up until delivery, Congress could pass a joint resolution blocking a sale and should immediately consider doing so,” he said. To help, he added, the chairmen and ranking members of the House Foreign Affairs and Senate Foreign Relations committees can request 30-day pre-delivery notifications. “Congress still has many paths it can take to both register concern about the president misusing emergency powers in this instance and ultimately act to stop the sales and shipments,” he said. “This starts with speaking out, as many have already, making their displeasure clear.” Several lawmakers have pledged to pursue legislation on the issue, but few have offered specifics. Menendez in his statement said he was “in discussion with several Democratic and Republican colleagues,” adding that he hoped “the Senate Foreign Relations and the House Foreign Affairs Committees will soon be able to expeditiously address this latest attack on our constitutional responsibilities.” Menendez’s office did not respond to a request for further details on Tuesday. Sen. Chris Murphy (Conn.), the top Democrat on the Foreign Relations subpanel with oversight of Middle East affairs, similarly said in his statement he is “working on legislation to restrict arm sales.” His office said Tuesday it did not have more specifics. Menendez and Murphy are among the senators who previously offered a bipartisan bill that would suspend transfers of weapons to Saudi Arabia. The measure was first introduced in 2018 amid outrage over the Saudis’ killing of U.S.-based journalist Jamal Khashoggi. The legislation was introduced again in February. Co-sponsors of the bill, known as the Saudi Arabia Accountability and Yemen Act, include Trump ally Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), who has said he opposes the administration’s decision to use emergency authorities on the Saudi arms sales. “I’ve got a real problem with going back to doing business as usual with Saudi Arabia,” Graham said on “Fox News Sunday.” “Jordan is a great ally. The UAE has been problematic in Yemen, but a good ally. Saudi Arabia is a strategic ally, but the crown prince was, in my opinion, involved in the murder of Mr. Khashoggi, and he’s done a lot of other disruptive things. So I don’t support the arms sales now.” Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Jim Risch (R-Idaho) has not committed to taking up the Saudi accountability bill. Asked about renewed efforts to push the Saudi Accountability Act, Risch's spokeswoman told The Hill he continues to work on his own legislation that "could garner broad support" to deal with ongoing issues related to Saudi Arabia. "His aim is to find a pragmatic legislative solution that will yield results, and importantly, one that could become law," spokeswoman Suzanne Wrasse said in an email Wednesday. The administration cited what it called a heightened threat from Iran as the reason for the emergency sales. The White House has pointed to the situation with Iran as the basis for deployments of more U.S. troops and weapons to the region. The administration also noted that the emergency authority has been used at least four times before: in 1979, 1984, 1990 and 2006. The 1984 example is “particularly relevant in this context,” a State Department official told The Hill on Tuesday. In that case, the Reagan administration cited “escalation” in the Iran-Iraq War, including attacks on Saudi oil tankers, and “ominous” trends in the war to expedite the sale of 400 Stinger missiles to the Saudis. “In this determination, the U.S. government specifically pointed to the need to reassure partners of our commitment to their defense,” the official said. “Iran’s disruptive behavior has not changed in the 35 years since, and neither has the U.S. stalwart nature of our support for our Gulf partners.” Lawmakers could also try to attach amendments to must-pass defense bills, like the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) and spending bills, coming through the House and Senate soon. Sen. Chris Van Hollen (D-Md.) said in a statement after the notification he “will work to close this loophole in the appropriations process and use every available tool to prevent President Trump from taking this action.” A Van Hollen staffer told The Hill on Tuesday that the senator is looking at ways to block Trump’s action in the annual appropriations bill for the State Department. Rep. Ro Khanna (D-Calif.) also pledged to try to use the defense spending bill and NDAA to “stop bomb sales and end all forms of U.S. participation in this war” in Yemen. Khanna, who was the chief House sponsor of the Yemen war powers resolution, told The Hill on Tuesday he is hopeful Trump’s decision on arms sales will give momentum to his effort to persuade House leadership to sue over Trump’s veto of the resolution. “First it was the War Powers Resolution, now it’s arms sales,” he said in a statement to The Hill. “Once again, this president defied Congress to continue supporting the Saudis and Emiratis in their war in Yemen. I’m confident these new arms sales provides new momentum for pursuing legal action and legislation that would end U.S. involvement in the war.”
On May 23, 2019, multiple news outlets reported that the White House was considering an emergency declaration to permit arms shipments to Saudi Arabia without Congressional approval. These reports were met with sharp criticism by multiple legislators. These recent developments shine a spotlight on the contours of the Congressional notice and approval mechanisms set forth in the Arms Export Control Act (AECA). AECA (22 U.S.C. § 2751 et seq.) is the authorizing statute for the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program. AECA and the implementing guidance from the Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA) set forth the procedures for the development of a transaction under the FMS program, referred to as an FMS case. Once an FMS case has been negotiated between the U.S. Government and the foreign government purchaser, the White House is required submit a formal notification to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations (although this requirement is subject to country- and defense article-specific dollar value thresholds). Congress then has 30 days (or 15 days for certain proposed sales to a NATO county, Australia, Japan, South Korea, Israel, or New Zealand) to enact a joint resolution opposing the sale. Unless a joint resolution is passed within the time period, Congress is considered to have consented to the sale. For major weapons sales, formal notification is often preceded by informal communications between the Executive Branch and Congress. Relevant here, Senator Bob Menendez, the ranking Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, has exercised an informal hold on sales of munitions to Saudi Arabia for the past year based on concerns regarding the loss of civilian life during Saudi Arabia’s military operations in Yemen. These concerns have bi-partisan support, which signals that a joint resolution opposing any formal notification may be possible if the White House chooses to force the issue. The AECA statute provides the President two avenues for short-circuiting the Congressional review process. First, AECA provides that the President need not wait for the 30-day notice period to expire when “an emergency exists which requires that consent to the proposed transfer become effective immediately in the national security interests of the United States…” 22 U.S.C. § 2753(d)(2)(A). Second, the President has the power to veto any joint resolution blocking an FMS transaction. Prior to 1986, AECA provided Congress the right to exercise a Congressional veto over a sale through a concurrent resolution without presentment to the President, but the statute was amended to remove this procedure after the Supreme Court ruled that a comparable procedure in the immigration context was unconstitutional. See INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983). Given the practical challenges of overcoming a Presidential veto, the power of Congress to block an arms sale through a joint resolution under AECA has historically been limited, and according to a Congressional Research Service report issued in April 2019, Congress has never successfully blocked a proposed arms sales by use of a joint resolution. Nevertheless, the specter of Congressional oversight does influence the FMS process in many situations, including in these recent proposed sales to Saudi Arabia. Recent media reports have stated that the White House may rely on the “national security interests of the United States” to justify the contemplated arms sales bypass the 30-day waiting period for Congressional review, and immediately effectuate a sale of arms to Saudi Arabia. How the White House and Congress resolve this simmering dispute may have significant implications for the FMS program as a whole, and we will continue to monitor these events as they unfold.
“While I understand that Saudi Arabia is a strategic ally, the behavior of Mohammed bin Salman cannot be ignored,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who voted to block the arms sale. Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times “While I understand that Saudi Arabia is a strategic ally, the behavior of Mohammed bin Salman cannot be ignored,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who voted to block the arms sale. “While I understand that Saudi Arabia is a strategic ally, the behavior of Mohammed bin Salman cannot be ignored,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who voted to block the arms sale. Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times WASHINGTON — The Senate voted to block the sale of billions of dollars of munitions to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates on Thursday, in a sharp and bipartisan rebuke of the Trump administration’s attempt to circumvent Congress to allow the exports by declaring an emergency over Iran. In three back-to-back votes, Republicans joined Democrats to register their growing anger with the administration’s use of emergency power to cut lawmakers out of national security decisions, as well as the White House’s unflagging support for the Saudis despite congressional pressure to punish Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman after the killing in October of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi. A United Nations report released Wednesday made the most authoritative case to date that responsibility for the killing and its cover-up lies at the highest levels of the Saudi royal court. A spotlight on the people reshaping our politics. A conversation with voters across the country. And a guiding hand through the endless news cycle, telling you what you really need to know. No other foreign policy issue has created as large a rift between President Trump and Congress, and the vote to block the arms sales deepens the divide. It is the second time in just a few months that members of Mr. Trump’s party have publicly opposed his foreign policy, with both the House and Senate approving bipartisan legislation this spring to cut off military assistance to Saudi Arabia’s war in Yemen using the 1973 War Powers Act, only to see it vetoed. People inspected the damage after a neighborhood in Sana’a, Yemen, was hit by a Saudi-led airstrike last month.Yahya Arhab/EPA, via Shutterstock People inspected the damage after a neighborhood in Sana’a, Yemen, was hit by a Saudi-led airstrike last month. People inspected the damage after a neighborhood in Sana’a, Yemen, was hit by a Saudi-led airstrike last month. Yahya Arhab/EPA, via Shutterstock While the Democrat-controlled House is also expected to block the sales, Mr. Trump has pledged to veto the legislation, and it is unlikely that either chamber could muster enough support to override the president’s veto. Seven Republicans — not nearly enough to override a veto — broke from their party to disapprove of the sales to Saudi Arabia: Senator Susan Collins of Maine, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Senator Mike Lee of Utah, Senator Jerry Moran of Kansas, Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky and Senator Todd Young of Indiana. “This vote is a vote for the powers of this institution to be able to continue to have a say on one of the most critical elements of U.S. foreign policy and national security,” said Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, the top Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee and lead sponsor of the resolutions of disapproval. “To not let that be undermined by some false emergency and to preserve that institutional right, regardless of who sits in the White House.” The White House announced the sales late last month, and invoked an emergency provision in the Arms Export Control Act to allow American companies to sell $8.1 billion worth of munitions in 22 pending transfers to the three Arab nations. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are waging an air war in Yemen that has come under sharp criticism from Congress and human rights organizations. Members of Congress from both parties have been holding up arms sales from American companies to Persian Gulf nations and trying to end American military support for the Saudi-led coalition that is fighting Houthi rebels in Yemen, which has resulted in what the United Nations calls the world’s worst man-made humanitarian disaster. By declaring an emergency over Iran, the administration was able to override those holds. “If we let this emergency declaration go without protest, without a vote, I don’t know that we’re ever getting the power to oversee arms sales back as a body,” said Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, and one of the authors of the resolution. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo had pushed hard for the emergency designation, over the objections of career Foreign Service officers and legislators, arguing that the sales would support allies like Saudi Arabia to counter Iran and its partner Arab militias — though some of the munitions would take years to produce and deliver. In the weeks after the declaration was announced, lawmakers have scrutinized the role that a former Raytheon lobbyist played in the decision. In our video, a former State Department official sent to advise the Saudi-led coalition says he saw firsthand how it failed to avoid civilian casualties in Yemen — and how the U.S. chose to look the other way. Some Senate Republicans endorsed the administration’s position on Thursday, arguing that rejecting the arms sales would be overly blunt with unintended consequences as tensions with Iran escalate. The question the Senate will consider, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, said, “is whether we’ll lash out at an imperfect partner and undercut our own efforts to build cooperation, check Iran and achieve other important goals, or whether we’ll keep our imperfect partners close and use our influence.” But the administration’s argument ultimately fell flat even for some of the president’s closest allies, like Mr. Graham, who co-sponsored the legislation with Mr. Menendez. “The reason I’m voting with Senator Paul and others today is to send a signal to Saudi Arabia that if you act the way you’re acting, there is no space for a strategic relationship,” he said. “There is no amount of oil you can produce that will get me and others to give you a pass on chopping somebody up in a consulate.” The original legislation Mr. Menendez and Mr. Graham introduced would have forced senators to vote on 22 separate resolutions of disapproval, one vote for each arms sale. But a deal struck with Mr. McConnell grouped the resolutions into three votes — and also ensured that the Foreign Relations Committee will take up a bill sponsored by Mr. Menendez that would curtail the ability of the president to use emergency authority to sell arms. The vote came the same day that Britain announced it would temporarily suspend approval of any new licenses to sell arms to Saudi Arabia, after an unexpected court ruling that ministers had acted unlawfully in allowing the sale of weapons when there was a clear possibility they might be used in violation of international humanitarian law in Yemen.
In Thursday’s speech before the National Defense University, President Obama reflected on the concerns about “morality and accountability” raised by drone strikes. Emphasizing the importance of “clear guidelines” and intelligence gathering to properly “constrain” the use of drones, the president also maintained a firm stance on their necessity: Even though drone strikes sometimes result in civilian casualties, in many circumstances they remain the most effective option for realizing specific military objectives. As a liberal, I’m against drones essentially by reflex. At least, I used to be. Recently, I’ve begun to reconsider that view; and I’m no longer sure where I come down on the morality of drone strikes. Disturbing as I find state-sponsored violence, when drones do the killing instead of soldiers, it seems apparent that we have an easier time recognizing the violence as horrific. War, in its traditional form, distorts our moral reasoning. Drones do not. And as much it grates against my broader political commitments to say so, this is plainly a benefit of drone warfare, other shortcomings notwithstanding. Many detractors have pointed out that drone strikes, because they put none of our soldiers in harm’s way, are “less costly.” Without our own lives on the line, the theory goes, leaders will feel little compunction — not even the minimal compunction of political exposure — about condemning other human beings to death, especially when those other human beings live many thousands of miles away. To me, this critique seems undeniably right: the numbness that results from using machines rather than soldiers to carry out our dirty work is obviously a moral shortcoming of drone warfare. Simply put, when violence is employed more easily, it will also be employed more often. Hence the nightmarish image of an 18-year-old drone operator basically playing video games from the detached safety of a Nevada bunker. But there is another moral dimension to drone warfare, running in the opposite direction, which I fear has been lost in the haze of (rightful) outcry. For the same reason that drone warfare stands to make violence easier to deploy — none of our lives are on the line — it also makes violence harder to rationalize. The pain and death of drone strikes, unlike the pain and death of traditional missions, can draw no comfort from narratives of heroism. Destruction wrought by machines is neither noble nor grand. It’s asinine, and unfailingly repugnant. This means that drone strikes must be justified on their own terms, without recourse to war’s long-standing mystification. In a world where we apotheosize soldiers, and rope off their actions from everyday opprobrium, it’s important to consider whether the banal violence of machines might be preferable to the lionized violence of men. A year ago, Tom Engelhardt published a memorable essay in the Nation on the vileness of drone warfare. Taking a healthily incredulous view of the Obama administration’s assurance that it would use its lurid toy for exclusively virtuous ends, Engelhardt concluded with a flourish of outrage: “What [our leaders] can’t see in the haze of exceptional self-congratulation is this: they are transforming the promise of America into a promise of death. And death, visited from the skies, isn’t precise. It isn’t glorious. It isn’t judicious. It certainly isn’t a shining vision. It’s hell.” Magnificently put: The only trouble is that these same critiques would apply just as forcefully, if not more so, to traditional warfare. War isn’t precise. It isn’t glorious. It isn’t judicious. It isn’t a shining vision. It’s hell. The difference between traditional warfare and drone strikes is that the latter can be clearly identified as hellacious. Not just by poets and philosophers – but by everyone, everywhere, in the immediacy of its horror. When innocent people end up dead as the result of a drone strike, we easily recognize that outcome as morally lamentable. Undaunted by the symbolic distortion of the battlefield, we confront drones with the skepticism — and, as the case may be, the outrage — that accompanies moral clarity. The burden of proof inverts. Unlike traditional warfare, when the loss of life on the other side is presumptively acceptable, and it only becomes unacceptable if circumstances render it so, in the case of drone strikes, the loss of lives on the other side is presumptively unacceptable, and it only becomes acceptable if a persuasive rationale can be offered. Such rationales are not impossible to formulate, but it faces a steep upward grade. It’s an argument of last resort, defensive rather than triumphant. Before exploring what practical light this observation can shed on drone strikes, it’s worth pausing to ask why moral judgment comes under strain during wartime. The answer is simple: we prize our own lives over enemy lives. This state of affairs is not necessarily justifiable on moral grounds. In fact, it seems plainly unjustified on moral grounds. But it’s also a social fact. A helpful analogy can be drawn to familial relations. Moral philosophers have encountered notorious difficulty in trying to rationalize the treatment of family members differently than the treatment of strangers. In both settings — family and war — the basic problem is the same. Justice makes no claim on love. Membership in a particular polity, no less than membership in a particular family, is a feature of the world to which we are attached – a condition inherited rather than chosen, which, despite its randomness, cannot be overcome by wordplay or will. Confronted with a question like, “Why should their soldiers die before ours?” an objective vantage point — the abstract stance of morality — is simply unavailable. The dynamic of attachment at play in traditional warfare has persisted since time immemorial, and it is unlikely to relent soon. Nor am I trying to criticize it. Moral judgment is harsh, taut and withering; with good reason do we shield things we love from its gaze. At the same time, the difficulty involved in making sense of violence wrought by our troops also illuminates something important about the interpretation of wartime acts: The task of justifying an act of violence before the fact is distinct from the task of interpreting an act of violence after the fact. For example, in the face of a mission that made strategic sense but ended up yielding massive casualties, it would strike us as perfectly reasonable for an observer to say: “I was in favor of this mission, but now that I see the results, I am horrified.” The first thought — “I was in favor of this mission” — goes to whether, ex ante, the predicates of legitimate force existed. The second thought — “but now that I see the results, I am horrified” — goes to whether, ex post, the externalities can be rationalized. And even more familiar is the inverse style of claim, in response to a mission that seemed heinous or imprudent but, for reasons outside of the observer’s control, was pursued: “Much as I opposed the mission to begin with, once our troops were on the ground, I believe they did what they had to do.” This commonplace formulation speaks to the way the battlefield consternates moral judgment. It’s one thing to advocate against the deployment of troops – but once the troops are deployed, a switch flips. Because soldiers make the ultimate sacrifice, their actions are not subject to typical moral analysis. What goes on “over there” stands beyond the comprehension — and beyond the everyday reproach — of civilians. This is not to say that soldiers act with moral impunity. Of course they do not. But the moral constraints of the battlefield are of an attenuated kind, very far off, and shrouded in mystique. In this respect, drones represent a welcome shift of paradigm: they stand to clarify the moral stakes of state-sponsored violence by eliminating the dynamic of attachment that has traditionally accompanied it. By itself, of course, this proposition does not entail that drone strikes are preferable to traditional troop deployments. What it does entail, however, is that the benefits of moral clarity should be weighed, in practice, against the drawbacks of less circumspect decision-making. As much as drones are liable to desensitize leaders, making violence easier to employ, the outrage they produce is also likely to have a chilling effect in the other direction. Which way will this calculus ultimately run? We exercise an important threshold of control over this question. Whether the anesthetic effect of machine-induced violence will outstrip the sense of outrage that violence-by-machines provoke, or vice versa, is not a static political fact to which we must be resigned – it’s a hard issue for us to deliberate with care. One thing, however, is certain. Moral clarity in the face of drone strikes, as compared to troop deployments, is only politically worthwhile — indeed, only possible — insofar as members of the public are kept informed about when drone strikes are happening, and what damage they cause. Transparency is a precondition of outrage – and of accountability. Importantly, this does not necessarily mean that information about drone strikes should be publicized, and subject to approval, before the fact. The question of ex ante oversight, which has begotten protracted debate in the popular media and academic circles alike, is an incredibly difficult one – as ever with respect to decisions that bear on national security. Many proposals have emerged, running the gamut from leaving the president and military leaders unfettered to make strategic decisions — as in traditional theaters of war — to full-blown judicial review of drone strikes. Sound arguments exist on both sides of this debate, and they are the usual arguments that tend to sprout up around wartime violence. Make leaders too accountable, one side laments, and their decisions will blow in the political wind, reflecting external pressures rather than national security interests. But grant leaders too much discretion, the other side rejoins, and the power they wield — the most tremendous power of all, over life and death — will transform from a means of protection into a wellspring of abuse.
Prepare for Reality of Use as Drones Proliferate As drones proliferate, they will open up opportunities for state and non-state actors to use military force in novel ways, such as in gray zone conflicts or air attacks by non-state groups. Anticipating which capabilities drones enable will be a continuous challenge as commercial and military drone technology advances and adds to the variety of possible uses. Wargames and tabletop exercises are valuable analytic tools to help elucidate these various uses. Wargaming will stimulate the kind of creative thinking that can help policymakers anticipate challenges and possible responses, and can help inform future U.S. strategy and policy.
Prior to September 11 and the advent of TAC, there was virtually no discourse on the permissible geographic scope of armed conflict. This is un-surprising, considering almost all armed conflicts of this period were internal, or relatively confined inter–State conflicts.34 Even when internal armed conflicts “spilled over” into neighboring territories, no State asserted the authority to conduct “global” operations against the non–State insurgent enemy. Use of the term “Global War on Terror” fundamentally altered the existing paradigm. Suddenly, a State was invoking the authority to engage what it determined were belligerent operatives wherever the opportunity to do so arose. U.S. global reach and dominant combat capability made it clear that this new enemy could not afford the risk of “basing” operations out of operational clusters confined to one geographic area. Because dispersion had to, by necessity, become the modus operandi of this new enemy,35 it inherently drove operations to extend beyond the “hot zone” of Afghan-istan.36
Eliminating the Threat: Aerial Strikes Offensive Counterterrorism The second phase of disrupting terrorism is eliminating the threat from the battlefield. According to Boyle, terrorism is a dynamic, asymmetric form of warfare that requires aggressive, precise action against the organization.23 In President Obama’s words, “battlefields have evolved and changed”, and therefore, it is necessary to take preemptive action in order to eliminate the possibility of a terrorist attack.24 “We must disrupt al Qaeda’s terrorist planning before it gets anywhere near our homeland or our citizens”. Aggressive, preemptive action, therefore, must be taken in order to eliminate the threat before it does any harm. Action may include everything from freezing financial assets, detention, and lethal strikes. As I will show, drones have been particularly effective at lethally eliminating top terrorist leadership.
The black market would be a clear path for the Islamic State to obtain materials that could be used in a CBRNE attack. In 2015, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and Moldovan investigators ran a sting operation against a suspected arms smuggler in Moldovia attempting to sell to what he thought was a representative from the Islamic State high-grade uranium (Cesium 137). The smuggler was intentionally seeking a Middle Eastern buyer, so the weapon could be used on “the Americans.” As indicated in the recent 2018 Worldwide Threat Assessment Intelligence report, produced by the Director of National Intelligence, both state and non-state actors have already demonstrated the development and use of CBRNE weaponry. The report emphasizes that, “chemical materials and technologies – almost always dual-use – move easily in the globalized economy, as do personnel with the scientific expertise to design and use them for legitimate and illegitimate purposes.” The Islamic State is the first non-state actor to combine a projectile delivery system with a banned chemical warfare agent, according to the Combating Terrorism Center.
Donald Trump’s March 21 interview with the Washington Post editorial board should make every potential voter’s blood run cold. After noting that ISIS should be knocked out flat, yet indicating that large numbers of U.S. troops should not be involved, Mr. Trump suggested that it was better to be “unpredictable” in the face of U.S. enemies, before twice dodging a question about whether he would advocate the use of tactical nuclear weapons against ISIS. (To be fair, the interview transcript indicates that much more time was spent discussing Mr. Trump’s hand size than anything to do with nuclear weapons.)
In my opinion, there is no need to amend the AUMF to define the geographic scope of military operations it authorizes. On the contrary, I believe doing so would fundamentally undermine the efficacy of U.S. counter-terror military operations by overtly signaling to the enemy exactly where to pursue safe-haven and de facto immunity from the reach of U.S. power. This concern is similar to that associated with explicitly defining co- belligerents subject to the AUMF, although I believe it is substantially more significant. It is an operational and tactical axiom that insurgent and non-state threats rarely seek the proverbial "toe to toe" confrontation with clearly superior military forces. Al Qaeda is no different. Indeed, their attempts to engage in such tactics in the initial phases of Operation Enduring Freedom proved disastrous, and ostensibly caused the dispersion of operational capabilities that then necessitated the co-belligerent assessment. Imposing an arbitrary geographic limitation of the scope of military operations against this threat would therefore be inconsistent with the strategic objective of preventing future terrorist attacks against the United States.
The most profound distinction between regulating government power in armed conﬂict versus peacetime exists in relation to the application of deadly force by government actors in both contexts. From a military operations perspective, conceding state actors are prohibited in both contexts from arbitrary deprivations of life is not particularly troubling, so long as the most critical distinction between peacetime and wartime authority is recognized: the legitimate application of deadly force as a measure of ﬁrst resort against operational opponents during armed conﬂict, a distinction reﬂ ected in the regulatory norms of the LOAC. ¶ Th is is not to suggest that the LOAC permits belligerents to employ methods or means of warfare that make death an inevitable result. Prohibition against such action was one of the ﬁ rst developments in this body of law. 84 However, this prohibition does not, as is asserted by some, establish that attempting to kill an opponent as a measure of ﬁrst resort is also prohibited. There is an important distinction between these two propositions. Use of deadly force as a measure of ﬁrst resort does indicate that death is the intended outcome of the engagement, but it does not make death inevitable. Instead, it is a method of warfare intended to maximize the probability of disabling an opponent. ¶ Achieving this eﬀect is central to military operations, and is reﬂ ected in the consistent practice of states as evidenced by combat operations, training, and the type of weapons provided to armed forces. Th is reality has been emphasized by W. Hays Parks, one of the most respected experts on the relationship between the LOAC and military weaponry. In his 2006 article Conventional Weapons and Weapons Review, Parks criticizes reliance by the International Committee of the Red Cross on the principle of unnecessary suﬀ ering as a basis to assert the LOAC imposes an obligation to use the least deadly means possible to subdue a belligerent opponent:¶ [Th e ICRC document, Weapons that May Cause Unnecessary Suﬀ ering or Have Indiscriminate Eﬀ ects ,] suggests that the prohibition of unnecessary suﬀ ering or superﬂ uous injury meant “if combatant can be put out of action by taking him prisoner, he should not be injured; if he can be put out of action by injury, he should not be killed; and if he can be put out of action by light injury, grave injury should be avoided. Th is argument is not consistent with state practice or the practical nature of the battleﬁeld, much less the domestic law of most nations with regard to law enforcement use of deadly force against its own citizens. Subsequent negotiations in the CCW process did not support this argument as a deﬁnition of what constitutes unnecessary suﬀering or superﬂuous injury. 85¶ Use of deadly force as a measure of ﬁrst resort is, contrary to the improper assertion challenged by Parks, reﬂected in the combined eﬀect of the customary principle of military necessity 86 and the positive rule of military objective. 87 Military necessity justiﬁ es the use of all means not otherwise prohibited by international law which are necessary to bring about the prompt submission of an opponent. 88 The rule of military objective deﬁnes enemy forces as lawful military objectives, thereby rendering them legitimate objects of attack. 89 Accordingly, deliberate targeting of enemy personnel is permitted by the LOAC based not on a manifestation of actual threat, but instead on a presumption of necessity derived from the determination of status as ‘enemy’. 90 Once that status is determined, the law permits armed forces to use the most eﬃcient means to subdue the enemy personnel, which in operational terms is synonymous with the use of deadly force as a measure of ﬁrst resort. ¶ This legal standard for depriving someone of life is diametrically opposed to the authority of state actors to employ deadly force in a peacetime context. Use of deadly force against individuals who are not operational opponents in an armed conﬂ ict is strictly cause based: there must be a causal connection between the conduct of the object of force and the use of deadly force. 91 Accordingly, deadly force is presumptively invalid unless and until the state actor determines that a genuine individual necessity to employ force exists. 92 In addition, even when such necessity exists, the degree of force may be only that which is necessary to restore the status quo ante. Th us, the state actor is only permitted to employ deadly force when no lesser means will eﬀ ectively reduce a direct and speciﬁ c threat, producing a use of deadly force as a last resort requirement. 93¶ Th ere are, of course, situations when state actors must resort to such use without ﬁ rst exhausting lesser means. However, the legitimacy of such use of force in these situations is contingent on a determination that the threat can only be reduced by deadly force, thereby justifying the bypass of less harmful means. 94 Perhaps even more important is the reality that during peacetime, the law does not tolerate employment of any force, let alone deadly force, based on conclusive presumptions. Th us, unlike the armed conﬂ ict context, there is never a conclusive presumption of hostility and the accordant necessity to employ deadly force based on status determinations in peacetime. Use of force must instead always be responsive to the conduct manifested by the object of state power. 95 Only such a paradigm ensures that the objects of force are protected from overbroad applications of authority, or, arbitrary deprivations of life. 96¶ This is instructive on a critical substantive distinction between human rights norms and LOAC norms: the LOAC assumes and tolerates a degree of overbreadth that is inconsistent with human rights law. For example, because application of deadly force is justiﬁed based on status instead of conduct – which itself is based on a conclusive presumption that operational opponents pose a constant threat of deadly force – the LOAC allows the inﬂiction of death on enemy personnel irrespective of the actual risk they present (of course, once the enemy is subdued and rendered hors de combat the justiﬁ cation terminates). Human rights law tolerates no such overbreadth. It would simply be absurd to suggest that police could lawfully employ deadly force against suspected criminals based solely on a determination an individual was a member of a criminal group. ¶ Th is distinction may seem axiomatic to many LOAC practitioners and scholars. However, the increasing call for application of human rights norms during armed conﬂict is leading to the inevitable ‘mixing’ of these diametrically opposed standards for a legitimate use of deadly force. This was most visibly apparent in the Targeted Killing decision of the Israeli High Court of Justice. 97 After endorsing the government’s contention that operations against Hamas personnel qualiﬁ ed as an armed conﬂ ict, thereby triggering LOAC application, 98 the Court turned to the authority to kill as a ﬁ rst resort. Logical consistency should have dictated that the Court endorse such authority when directed towards individuals determined to qualify as enemy operatives; however, the Court adopted a diﬀ erent approach. Deprivation of life would only be justiﬁ ed when lesser means for reducing the threat were ineﬀ ective. 99 Th us, the Court apparently imposed a peacetime human rights standard for subduing an identiﬁ ed operational opponent in the context of an armed conﬂ ict. ¶ Th is might be explicable due to the unique nature of the territory in which the operations were conducted. Th e Court noted the special obligations of Israel when conducting operations in the administered (occupied) territories: Th e law of belligerent occupation recognizes the authority of the military commander to maintain security in the area and to thus protect the security of his country and its citizens. However, it imposes upon the use of this authority the condition of a proper balance between that security and the rights, needs, and interests of the local population. ¶ Arrest, investigation, and trial are not means which can always be used. At times the possibility does not exist whatsoever; at times it involves a risk so great to the lives of the soldiers, that it is not required. However, it is a possibility which should always be considered. It might actually be particularly practical under the conditions of belligerent occupation, in which the army controls the area in which the operation takes place, and in which arrest, investigation, and trial are at times realizable possibilities. 100¶ However, what was striking about the opinion was the overall absence of qualiﬁ cation to the ruling. Th us, the opinion might be seen as a broader endorsement of extending human rights norms to the context of armed conﬂ ict. ¶ Another potentially more expansive example of this mixing of legal standards is reﬂ ected in the position of the International Committee of the Red Cross on the limitations applicable to armed forces vis–à-vis disabling their enemies during armed conﬂ ict in the recently published Direct Participation in Hostilities Study. 101 Th e ICRC asserts that the LOAC imposes an obligation on combatants to refrain from employing deadly force when an enemy can be subdued with a less severe degree of force. According to the Study:¶ In sum, while operating forces can hardly be required to take additional risks for themselves or the civilian population in order to capture an armed adversary alive, it would defy basic notions of humanity to kill an adversary or to refrain from giving him or her an opportunity to surrender where there manifestly is no necessity for the use of lethal force. In such situations, the principles of military necessity and of humanity play an important role in determining the kind and degree of permissible force against legitimate military targets. 102¶ It is noteworthy that although this assertion appears in the Direct Participation in Hostilities study, it is not conﬁ ned to civilians who lose their immunity from being made the objects of attack as the result of such direct participation (a qualiﬁ er which would have arguably limited the potential signiﬁ cance of the interpretation). To be clear, what is proposed is that when engaging an enemy combatant during armed conﬂ ict – an individual who by virtue of his or her status qualiﬁ es as a lawful military objective – the engaging force bears an obligation to refrain from the use of deadly force if some lesser degree of violence would produce submission. 103¶ Th at the ICRC would have an interest in advancing an interpretation of the law that operates to protect combatants from death when injury or capture is a possible alternative is unsurprising considering the historic mandate of that organization. 104 It is also undoubtedly in the eyes of some admirable. Nonetheless, the suggested interpretation of the law represents a dangerous confusion between law and policy. Even the ICRC acknowledges the lack of consensus on this interpretation:¶ It is in this sense that Pictet’s famous statement should be understood that “[i]f we can put a soldier out of action by capturing him, we should not wound him; if we can obtain the same result by wounding him, we must not kill him. If there are two means to achieve the same military advantage, we must choose the one which causes the lesser evil”. During the expert meetings, it was generally recognized that the approach proposed by Pictet is unlikely to be operable in classic battleﬁ eld situations involving large scale confrontations and that armed forces operating in situations of armed conﬂ ict, even if equipped with sophisticated weaponry and means of observation, may not always have the means or opportunity to capture rather than kill. 105 ¶ Th is acknowledgment reveals that the LOAC establishes the outer limits of permissible conduct; it has never established a mandate that combatants employ the full scope of authority granted by the law to subdue an enemy. Put more simply, authority is not synonymous with obligation. As a result, how commanders choose to exercise the authority they are granted by the LOAC is and has always been a choice dictated by operational considerations. Th us, it is certainly true that there have been and will undoubtedly continue to be many instances where a commander who could employ deadly force against an enemy chooses not to do so, but to instead employ a lesser degree of force to bring the enemy into submission. However, by characterizing the exercise of such operational restraint as a LOAC requirement, the ICRC is transforming an exercise of command discretion into a legal obligation that is unsupported by treaty law, custom, or historic operational practice. ¶ There are countless logical operational explanations for exercising such restraint, from the desire to capture the enemy as a means of obtaining intelligence to the eﬀ ort to demonstrate to other enemy personnel the wisdom of submission. However, it is critical to understand is that contrary to the ICRC suggestion, such restraint is not legally mandated. On the contrary, the only pre-submission protection aﬀorded to enemy personnel by the LOAC is the prohibition against the inﬂ iction of unnecessary suﬀ ering. 106 Even here, there is controversy related to the extent of the constraint. 107 As a matter of sheer military logic, it is diﬃcult to contest the proposition that the deliberate inﬂiction of death on an enemy operative when some lesser degree of force might produce submission is generally not considered suﬃcient to run afoul of this very limited protective rule, because attacking the enemy with deadly combat power is customarily considered necessary to force an opponent into submission. 108 Instead, the prohibition against inﬂicting unnecessary suﬀ ering requires the use of a method or means of warfare that is so attenuated from the goal of achieving this submission that it cannot rationally be considered necessary (which in eﬀ ect produces and inference of genuine malice). 109 Ironically, based on this customary understanding of the prohibition, there may be situations when causing death might actually be considered more humane than causing an injury that is particularly painful or diﬃ cult to heal, particularly where the inﬂ iction of injury is motivated by a calculation to impose a greater logistical burden on the enemy force. ¶ Th e ICRC interpretation of this prohibition distorts what a commander may do with what he must. Nothing in the LOAC obligates foregoing resort to deadly force as a measure of ﬁrst resort vis à vis an enemy when injury and/or capture would subdue that enemy. 110 If such a rule were to gain momentum, it would fundamentally alter the presumptions of permissible conduct that have guided combatant behavior since the inception of organized warfare. What is most troubling about this distortion is that it reﬂects a fundamental shift from a LOAC based analysis of authority to a human rights based analysis. Underlying the proposal is a rejection of the consequence of identifying an enemy as a ‘military objective’: the conclusive presumption that until rendered hors de combat the threat inherent in that designation/determination justiﬁes immediate resort to deadly force. In contrast, the ICRC interpretation makes the authority to employ deadly force contingent on assessment of actual threat, and thereby denies such authority when that actual threat is insuﬃcient to justify the use of that level of force. ¶ Linking the authority to employ deadly force against an operational opponent during armed conﬂict to determinations of actual threat may appeal to some. After all, why should it be permissible to kill enemy personnel whose conduct seems relatively non-threatening, such as a cook or a clerk? Th e answer to question lies in the very nature of armed conﬂ ict itself. The LOAC is based on the presumption that all members of an enemy force represent a threat suﬃcient to justify the use of deadly force as a means to produce enemy submission. 111 This must be a presumption, because by placing enemy armed forces into the category of lawful military objectives, the law eliminates any obligation to assess whether each enemy soldier represents an actual threat to the attacking force. ¶ It is undeniable that this presumption can at times be factually overbroad; however, it is equally undeniable that this overbreadth is tolerated by the LOAC. Furthermore, this overbreadth is oﬀ set by the inverse presump - tion applicable to civilians. Unlike combatants, civilians are presumed nonthreatening, and therefore presumptively immune from being made the object of attack. 112 Both these presumptions are powerful, but neither is irrebuttable. For the civilian, the presumption is rebutted when and for such time as he takes a direct part in hostilities 113 ; for the operational opponent, the presumption is rebutted when, and only when he is rendered hors de combat by surrender, wounds, sickness. 114¶ Th ese presumptions and their rebuttal requirements can never be absolutely consistent with ground truth. For example, a civilian may perform a function that is essential to providing a combat capability to an enemy, such as working as an expert in a critical defense industry. A combatant, in contrast, may perform a function that posses virtually no actual threat to an opponent, such as a cook or a clerk. As a result the civilian may be far more ‘dangerous’ to opposing armed forces than the combatant. However, the presumptions related to who and who may not be made the deliberate object of attack evolved to satisfy the reality of armed conﬂ ict – the need to promptly and eﬃ ciently bring an opponent into submission by providing a degree of operational clarity that has historically been considered essential by both the profession of arms and the international legal community. ¶ No analogous overbreadth is tolerated by human rights law. Instead, conduct is the only justiﬁ able basis for employing such force. 115 Of course, when connected with other facts and circumstances, the possession of a deadly weapon may establish a justiﬁ able inference that the citizen is going to act in a manner that creates a necessity for the use of deadly force by the oﬃ cer. However, this is diﬀ erent from the calculus engaged in by a combatant during armed conﬂ ict, for the presence of the weapon remains an indicator of conduct, and in no way creates a status that justiﬁ es the use of deadly force. ¶ Attempting to extend human rights based use of force standards into the realm of armed conﬂict is therefore not only illogical, it is operationally debilitating. The operational clarity provided by these presumptions is an essential component for developing a warrior ethos. 116 Soldiers are not police oﬃcers, and while it is certainly possible to train soldiers to operate with the type of restraint incumbent in the police function, 117 asking them to operate under such a framework during armed conﬂ ict is inconsistent with their fundamental purpose: to be ready, willing, and able to kill on demand. Showing mercy or restraint is, as noted above, always an option available to a commander who chooses not to exercise the full scope of his or her authority against an enemy. However, once the law requires assessment of the actual threat posed by an enemy combatant, the eﬀectiveness of combat capability will inevitably be diluted. 118
One of the issues Daskal addresses in her article beyond that of target identification is the legitimacy of applying the authority to kill as a measure of first resort to enemy belligerents outside “hot zones” of hostilities.64 This issue is obviously a focal point of the contemporary debate over the use of unmanned aerial systems (armed drones) to attack belligerent operatives. It is also at the center of the debate related to the authority to engage civilians taking a direct part in hostilities.65 What Daskal proposes, which is analogous to the ICRC DPH Interpretive Guidance,66 is that capture (rather than kill) should be obligatory when it is a feasible alternative to employing deadly force.67
The legal determination of what constitutes "the battlefield" has particular significance for the use of drones, particularly armed drones. This is because "the battlefield" is used to effectively define the scope of IHL's application. n31 In situations outside the scope of IHL, international human rights law (IHRL) n32 applies. For the [*300] purposes of this Article, the salient difference between these two bodies of law lies in their disparate provisions regarding the use of lethal force. IHL allows for lethal force to be employed based upon the status of the target. n33 A member of the enemy's forces may be targeted with lethal force based purely on his status as a member of those forces. n34 That individual does not have to pose a current threat to friendly forces or civilians at the time of targeting. n35 In contrast, IHRL permits lethal force only after a showing of dangerousness. n36 Under IHRL (the law enforcement model), lethal force may only be employed if the individual poses an imminent threat to law enforcement officers attempting arrest or to other individuals. n37 Further, IHRL requires that an opportunity to surrender be offered before lethal force is employed. n38
In the immediate aftermath of the May 1, 2011 raid that killed Osama bin Laden, one issue that dominated news stories and blogs for several days was the question of whether the Navy Seals executing the mission were obligated to attempt to capture bin Laden before killing him and, as a subsidiary question, whether bin Laden attempted to surrender before he was killed. n92 This issue highlights the distinction between the armed conflict and self-defense regimes and the dangers of conflating them most directly.
Expanding drone sales is not especially concerning for American security. The United States will still limit sales to allies and not allow sales of the most advanced models, some of which remain classified. However, for those concerned about armed drones in general, it’s reasonable to be wary, because this demonstrates that many countries plan to launch missiles from unmanned aircraft. Some of those countries will be less concerned with avoiding civilian casualties when firing at suspected terrorists, and some may use American-made drones for other purposes, such as domestic surveillance. That being said, Israel, India, China, Turkey, Iran and others produce drones similar to the models American companies sell. The United States restricting drone sales will not prevent other countries from acquiring them. What developments in the use of drones do you think might surprise people? Most people focus on governments deploying drones, but terrorists, insurgents and other nonstate actors are using them as well. Hezbollah acquires advanced models from Iran and is one of only 10 entities that have fired missiles from a drone at targets on the ground. The other nine are all countries. The Islamic State group buys small drones on the commercial market and adapts them for military use. The same $1,000 quadcopter models that businesses and hobbyists use for aerial photography can be used for battlefield surveillance. And in Iraq, Islamic State jury-rigged some of these small drones to drop bombs on U.S.-backed Iraqi and Kurdish forces, or to crash into them in a kamikaze-style attack. For the first time in history, insurgents can have an air force. The growing commercial drone market also creates concerns that terrorists will deploy them in the United States and other developed countries. Small, reasonably priced drones couldn’t take down a building, but they could carry a grenade-sized explosive, which weighs about the same as a camera. Governments are insufficiently prepared for this danger. How do you foresee the future military development and use of drones, and what’s driving it? How might it change military strategy and political decision-making? Drones will continue advancing, taking on an increasing number of military tasks. Some will start partnering with humans, increasing what one person can do on the battlefield. Some examples in development include a fighter pilot surrounded by a few semiautonomous support drones, a squad of soldiers with robotic pack mules to speed movement and small surveillance drones to help troops avoid ambushes. War is becoming robotized. These developments allow advanced militaries to act faster and more precisely, and reduce the risk to personnel. That means fewer combat deaths on “our” side and fewer civilian deaths on “their” side, both of which are positive developments. As a result, technologically advanced countries such as the United States will be able to sustain counterterrorist and counterinsurgency missions – such as the war in Afghanistan – for a longer time at lower cost, increasing the chances of victory.
The Obama administration relies on drones for one simple reason: they work. According to data compiled by the New America Foundation, since Obama has been in the White House, U.S. drones have killed an estimated 3,300 al Qaeda, Taliban, and other jihadist operatives in Pakistan and Yemen. That number includes over 50 senior leaders of al Qaeda and the Taliban -- top figures who are not easily replaced. In 2010, Osama bin Laden warned his chief aide, Atiyah Abd al-Rahman, who was later killed by a drone strike in the Waziristan region of Pakistan in 2011, that when experienced leaders are eliminated, the result is "the rise of lower leaders who are not as experienced as the former leaders" and who are prone to errors and miscalculations. And drones also hurt terrorist organizations when they eliminate operatives who are lower down on the food chain but who boast special skills: passport forgers, bomb makers, recruiters, and fundraisers.¶ Drones have also undercut terrorists' ability to communicate and to train new recruits. In order to avoid attracting drones, al Qaeda and Taliban operatives try to avoid using electronic devices or gathering in large numbers. A tip sheet found among jihadists in Mali advised militants to "maintain complete silence of all wireless contacts" and "avoid gathering in open areas." Leaders, however, cannot give orders when they are incommunicado, and training on a large scale is nearly impossible when a drone strike could wipe out an entire group of new recruits. Drones have turned al Qaeda's command and training structures into a liability, forcing the group to choose between having no leaders and risking dead leaders.¶ Critics of drone strikes often fail to take into account the fact that the alternatives are either too risky or unrealistic. To be sure, in an ideal world, militants would be captured alive, allowing authorities to question them and search their compounds for useful information. Raids, arrests, and interrogations can produce vital intelligence and can be less controversial than lethal operations. That is why they should be, and indeed already are, used in stable countries where the United States enjoys the support of the host government. But in war zones or unstable countries, such as Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia, arresting militants is highly dangerous and, even if successful, often inefficient. In those three countries, the government exerts little or no control over remote areas, which means that it is highly dangerous to go after militants hiding out there. Worse yet, in Pakistan and Yemen, the governments have at times cooperated with militants. If the United States regularly sent in special operations forces to hunt down terrorists there, sympathetic officials could easily tip off the jihadists, likely leading to firefights, U.S. casualties, and possibly the deaths of the suspects and innocent civilians.¶ Of course, it was a Navy SEAL team and not a drone strike that finally got bin Laden, but in many cases in which the United States needs to capture or eliminate an enemy, raids are too risky and costly. And even if a raid results in a successful capture, it begets another problem: what to do with the detainee. Prosecuting detainees in a federal or military court is difficult because often the intelligence against terrorists is inadmissible or using it risks jeopardizing sources and methods. And given the fact that the United States is trying to close, rather than expand, the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, it has become much harder to justify holding suspects indefinitely. It has become more politically palatable for the United States to kill rather than detain suspected terrorists.¶ Furthermore, although a drone strike may violate the local state's sovereignty, it does so to a lesser degree than would putting U.S. boots on the ground or conducting a large-scale air campaign. And compared with a 500-pound bomb dropped from an F-16, the grenadelike warheads carried by most drones create smaller, more precise blast zones that decrease the risk of unexpected structural damage and casualties. Even more important, drones, unlike traditional airplanes, can loiter above a target for hours, waiting for the ideal moment to strike and thus reducing the odds that civilians will be caught in the kill zone.¶ Finally, using drones is also far less bloody than asking allies to hunt down terrorists on the United States' behalf. The Pakistani and Yemeni militaries, for example, are known to regularly torture and execute detainees, and they often indiscriminately bomb civilian areas or use scorched-earth tactics against militant groups.
Aerial Elimination of Terrorist Leadership Counterterrorism drones are equipped to eliminate targets. The Predator, for example, holds AIM-92 Stinger air-to-air and AGM-114 Hellfire air-to-ground missiles.28 The AGM-114 Hellfire missile is a precise, laser-guided armament designed to eliminate an individual militant or a group of militants.29 Drone pilots learn not only how to deploy these weapon systems, but also learn how to utilize each weapon effectively.30 The angle of attack, airspeed, and nature of the threat are all factors that lead to the decision of how to deploy the drone’s capabilities effectively. The camera on the Predator drone has a complementary laser system that can be deployed remotely by a sensor operator. This camera can “paint” the target with the laser and the pilot can either chose to fire laser-guided Hellfire missiles or cooperate with another aircraft that will launch a similar attack. The F-16C aircraft that bombed Zarqawi’s compound ‘cooperated’ its laser-guided bomb with the laser that had been engaged from the loitering Predator drone. The drone employs and enables strikes.
We expect drone strikes that kill terrorist leaders will be associated with reductions in terrorist attacks. Previous research convincingly demonstrates that conducting effective terrorist attacks requires skilled individuals, many of whom are well-educated and come from upper middle- class backgrounds. 21 Indeed, captured documents containing detailed biographical data on foreign al Qa’ida militants in Iraq illustrate that among the foreign terrorists—who are conventionally known to be more sophisticated than local fighters—their most commonly listed “occupation” prior to arriving in Iraq was that of “student.” For militants for whom information on “experience” was available, “computers” was the most commonly listed experience type, just ahead of “weapons.”22
Disrupting Terrorist Operations The drone’s capability to collect intelligence and strike enemy combatants engenders fear in the ranks of al Qaeda. A 48-page memorandum, discovered in Osama bin Laden’s compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan during the raid in 2011 revealed that the leader himself was fearful of the US drone program.37 “During his final days, bin Laden’s world was filled with paranoia”. He advised his followers not to travel around Warizistan except on cloudy days, for fear of aerial assassination. He also advised his key leadership to depart and head toward Ghanzi, Zabul, and Kunar in Afghanistan, because high mountains and dense forests provide better coverage against aerial imagery and attacks. He even feared for his son, whom he neurotically advised to flee the droneridden tribal regions in Pakistan. In an international organization that already suffers because of lack of communication, organization, and leadership, these effects severely cripple operational capacity.
Moreover, drone strikes have disrupted al Qaeda’s system for training new recruits. The Times of London reports that in 2009, Al Qaeda leaders decided to abandon their traditional training camps because bringing new members to a central location offered too easy a target for drone strikes. Foreign Policy emphasized this trend on November 2nd, 2012, arguing that, “destroying communication centers, training camps and vehicles undermines the operational effectiveness of al-Qaeda and the Taliban, and quotes from operatives of the Pakistan-based Haqqani Network reveal that drones have forced them into a ‘jungle existence’ where they fear for the lives on a daily basis.” The threat of death from the skies has forced extremist organizations to become more scattered.
In this paper, I explore how the drone aircraft fits into military strategy. The United States Air Force and other air forces all over the world are currently evaluating how to incorporate the technology in an arsenal, and this analysis postulates that drones have a place in modern and future warfare. Specifically, the drone is a highly effective instrument of counterterrorism. Terrorism, highly elusive and adaptive, must be smitten down pervasively and aggressively. In order to do so, a nation must (1) identify the threat and (2) eliminate the threat. The drone contributes to the counterterrorism mission by providing pervasive intelligence and aggressive strike capabilities. Both of these capabilities, combined and unified in a single aircraft platform, hinder the operational capacity of the terrorist organization by eliciting fear, fracturing communication, and decimating command and control. Since 2008, the United States has increased the number of overseas drone operations.1 In Pakistan, for example, drone strikes have increased from 38 in 2008 to 375 in 2014. Targeting al Qaeda and Taliban militants, the drone campaign has been responsible for more than 2400 deaths worldwide.2 Furthermore, Congress is currently funding the expansion of the drone fleet by a third of its current size within the next decade, a $40 billion expansion.3 Clearly interested in the aircraft’s place in future warfare, Congress tasked the Government Accountability Office with analyzing, assessing, and improving the US Air Force’s drone program to ensure its viability in the future.4 Likewise, other Air Forces (including French, Italian, and German) are also testing the use of drones in the Middle East and Africa. There is a definite military interest in this technology. I seek to explore the root of this interest. Specifically, this paper provides an analysis of how an air force may use the drone in one specific area of foreign policy: counterterrorism. I will use historical examples of US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and Department of Defense (DoD) drone operations in order to illuminate how the aircraft fits into a nation’s military arsenal. I hope that this analysis will pave a purpose for the drone and prescribe focus for future technological development. I claim that the drone is an effective instrument of counterterrorism strategy because of its capabilities to simultaneously collect intelligence and strike targets. Furthermore, by effectively employing both at the same time, the drone significantly disrupts the operational capacity of a terrorist organization.
This study analyzes the effects of US drone strikes on terrorism in Pakistan. We find that drone strikes are associated with decreases in the incidence and lethality of terrorist attacks, as well as decreases in selective targeting of tribal elders. This matters for key ongoing debates. Some suggest that drone strikes anger Muslim populations and that consequent blowback facilitates recruitment and incites Islamist terrorism. Others argue that drone strikes disrupt and degrade terrorist organizations, reducing their ability to conduct attacks. We use detailed data on US drone strikes and terrorism in Pakistan from 2007–2011 to test each theory’s implications. The available data do not enable us to evaluate if drone strikes resulted in increased recruitment, but the data do allow us to examine if these strikes resulted in changes in terrorist activities. While our findings do not suggest long-term effects, the results still lend some credence to the argument that drone strikes, while unpopular, bolster US counterterrorism efforts in Pakistan.
The drone is a highly effective intelligence asset. In fact, USAF testimonials indicate that around 97% of mission time is dedicated purely to reconnaissance.12 The aircraft contributes to the intelligence cycle because it continuously and simultaneously collects and distributes information. Specifically, it collects intelligence efficiently via advanced visual equipment and long loiter capabilities. Both the Predator and the Reaper drones are equipped with high definition and thermal cameras on the undersides of their fuselages. These cameras are powerful enough to zoom and read the license number on a driver’s ID card.13 Pilots use the cameras’ high-powered capabilities when searching for and following potential targets.14 In this way, the aircraft collects useful intelligence about the behavioral patterns of the enemy (ie: family ties, associations, daily activities) while flying at a high altitude, unseen to the target on the ground. Furthermore, aerial imagery technology is vastly improving. For example, the US Air Force is experimenting with a high-tech camera system known as the Gorgon Stare.15 The Gorgon Stare essentially combines the visual capacity of multiple advanced cameras, allowing the aircraft to observe areas that are 4 kilometers in diameter. Some US Air Force Reaper drones have already been equipped with this new system, allowing pilots and intelligence analysts to observe parts of entire cities at one time. In this way, the drone is highly effective for gathering a large amount of visual data.
There are some who argue that drone warfare is unnecessary because the right approach is simply to defend the homeland from within the homeland; among liberals this is often a way of saying, fight terrorists with law enforcement and criminal law, while among some conservatives it corresponds closely with the resurgence of right-wing isolationism.
A potential concern with the previous findings is that it is possible that drone strikes do not actually reduce terrorist violence, but rather displace it. While drone strikes might cause militant activities to decline in the targeted agencies, they may cause an escalation in militant violence in proximate areas that are not subject to drone strikes if militants move their operations in response to UAV targeting in FATA. The concern with spillover effects is not just academic; media reporting points to it as a possible policy concern.47
Critics also claim that eliminating only the senior leaders of terrorist organizations does not make significant progress in eradicating the group as a whole. This argument falls short on two fronts. First, killing the leaders of Al Qaeda, the Taliban, and similar networks does hinder their operations: decapitating terrorist groups interrupts their planning, recruitment, and execution of attacks – not necessarily because each leader is irreplaceably vital to the success of the group (although some are), but because the threat of death from the skies shifts the strategic calculations of living leaders, changing the actions of the group. The Los Angeles Times of March 22nd, 2009, quoting an anonymous counterterrorism official, reported that Al Qaeda leaders are wondering who's next to be killed in a drone strike and have started hunting down people inside al Qaeda who they think are responsible for collaborating with the US on drone strike planning. The threat of drone strikes sows divisive suspicion inside enemy groups and distracts them from accomplishing their objectives.
Second, denying exports can degrade effectiveness and interoperability during coalition operations. By not exporting weapons to allies, supplier states potentially limit the ability of allies to share operational burdens. For instance, export controls and international agreements that blocked the transfer of armed drones to many NATO allies left Washington responsible for operating the bulk of armed drones in Afghanistan. This demand placed additional strain on the already under-manned and overstretched American capacity. Additionally, if states turn to alternate suppliers, their ability to easily operate with American forces may be reduced. Common systems and similar technical infrastructure helps streamline information sharing, planning, maintenance, and operations. Given the frequency of coalition operations in the current security environment, interoperability is key to increasing operational effectiveness and reducing the likelihood of mishaps and confusion during future crises and contingencies.
WASHINGTON ― A new RAND report assessing the proliferation of unmanned aerial vehicles suggests existing export controls for drones may hurt the U.S. more than it helps. Limiting U.S. drone exports has left a hole in the global market for the technology, especially in historically U.S.-dominated Middle East markets, which has been readily filled by U.S. competitors — specifically China and Russia. The Trump administration recently unveiled anew set of export policies regarding military technology in an attempt to facilitate the transfer of military technology, but the changes do not change the status of drones under the Missile Technology Control Regime, or MTCR. How does the MTCR work? The MTCR is a voluntary export control consortium of 35 nations designed to prevent signatories from proliferating longer-range cruise and ballistic missile technology. The arms control regime was extended to UAVs because early iterations of drones were considered a subset of cruise missile technology due to their active guidance system. The regime divides missiles into two categories. Category I items are capable of delivering a 500 kg payload more than 300 km. The sale of category I systems is restricted by a “strong presumption of denial,” meaning they are only exported in rare circumstances. The MQ-9 Reaper, RQ-4 Global Hawk and MQ-4 Triton are well-known unmanned systems that fall under this category. Over the past several years, U.S. partners such as Jordan, Saudi Arabia and UAE were denied requests to purchase American drones, and have since turned to China to purchase comparable systems. Trump administration officials have been attempting to alter the regime by adding new language that would drop any vehicle that flies under 650 kilometers per hour to category II systems. This would make all but the most advanced U.S. systems available for international sale. For example, the MQ-9 Reaper clocks in with a cruise speed of 230 mph or 370 kph, according to an Air Force facts sheet. Drone proliferation RAND found that 10 nations operate category I drones, and more than 15 operate near-category I systems that register just below the MTCR’s payload and distance restrictions. The report says increased proliferation rates are due to a handful of countries, specifically China, Israel and the United Arab Emirates, who are not party to the MCTR. More countries are expected to procure drones, which pose a “growing threat to U.S. and allied military operations,” the report says. While category I systems can deploy missiles and other guided munitions, their main threat lies in “their ability to conduct intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) operations against U.S. forces prior to hostilities,” according to RAND. “Adversaries that would otherwise have difficulty detecting U.S. force deployments, monitoring U.S. operations, and maintaining targeting data on U.S. units can employ UAVs to maintain situational awareness of U.S. capabilities” The report identifies Russia, China and Iran as unfriendly nations that will seek to utilize drones to complicate U.S. military operations. For example, China and Saudi Arabia recently agreed to set up a UAV manufacturing plant in Saudi Arabia for up to 300 new UAVs, and Italy will receive 20 Hammerhead UAVs from the UAE. The coproduction of regional drone factories “could further exacerbate the proliferation of large UAVs to the degree that these systems are exported to other nations,” according to RAND, and that hurts U.S. industry. A U.S.-sized hole Voluntarily restricting U.S. drone exports have allowed competitors to establish themselves in a market and expects to “grow from about $6 billion in 2015 to about $12 billion in 2025.” RAND expect export controls to have a negative impact on the U.S. industrial base, something those in industry already know. “What you are enabling the competition to do is not just to sell some hardware,” Linden Blue, General Atomic’s chief executive, told reporters during an Aug. 16, 2017 roundtable at the company’s headquarters in Poway, California. “You’re enabling it to build a customer base for at least 20 years, I would say. You’re enabling them to build a logistics system. It will take them many years to get to where we are right now, but you’re helping them start out. They should be very thankful.”
Keith Webster, the president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s Defense and Aerospace Export Council, also disputed the argument that selling more U.S. drones abroad will lead to the proliferation of WMD. Allowing China to control the market is where the true danger lies, he said.
Most exports of U.S.-manufactured UAV systems have been to countries that are signatories to the MTCR agreement. The only nations to receive U.S. category I or near–category I UAV systems have been U.S. allies and partners. Some U.S. partners, such as Jordan, the UAE, and Saudi Arabia, were denied requests to purchase armed UAVs from the United States and have turned to China to purchase these systems (see, for example, Page and Sonne, 2017, and Scarborough, 2015). Some allies are also seeking foreign UAVs to avoid some of the operational conditions that are imposed when purchasing U.S. systems. In general, the proliferation of UAVs to U.S. allies and partners does provide them with additional capabilities.
Bridging Capability Gaps; In addition to access to remote locations via overseas bases and access agreements, the United States may decide to draw on regional (such as language and cultural) or other capabilities of its partners. This argument may be especially salient in time of waging several high-intensity campaigns at once—an unlikely yet not an impossible prospect—and additional resources may be needed to fill U.S. capability gaps in a particular region or a type of operation. A capability gap, moreover, can be self-imposed by limiting the size of U.S. deployment overseas. As a result, the United States may need to work with partner nations to contribute additional troops to achieve qualitative superiority, yet such contributions may be relatively small (in Afghanistan, for instance, some countries contributed only tens or hundreds of troops, which were authorized for only narrowly defined tasks, resulting from national caveats and capability levels, requiring significant provision of resources from the U.S. military). In the 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review, the Department of Defense highlighted a shift from planning for “major regional conflicts” to developing strategy to counter a broader array of threats from state and non-state adversaries alike. This shift of thinking, manifested by campaigns against adversaries such as ISIL, underscores the growing need to work with regional partners who simultaneously understand the specific operational environment and can complement U.S. military capabilities or bridge specific capability gaps.Augmenting U.S. Capabilities; In addition to bridging capability gaps, senior U.S. leaders may be increasingly more inclined to draw on foreign capabilities in military operations as a result of budgetary and other domestic pressures. While relying on foreign troops to provide tactical services to the U.S. military may not always be the most cost-effective option (especially with partners not on par with the United States who require significant oversight or provision of resources), it may provide a much needed relief to U.S. troops in long, protracted campaigns; enable better intelligence collection; create better conditions for a political settlement of a conflict; and enable the U.S. military to adjust its posture to face emerging threats. Recent operations in Afghanistan and Iraq illustrated the ability of partner nations to conduct limited tasks with little to moderate U.S. support (such as Stability, Security, Transition & Reconstruction [SSTR] missions), and such collaboration may be preferred in future operations as well. In our interviews with U.S. force planners, the lack of U.S. capability in one area or another has rarely, if ever, been cited as a reason for operating with allies. Rather, cultural, political, and economic factors were raised as justifications for using foreign capabilities in a U.S.-led operation. These three types of factors, in turn, are closely associated with providing U.S. leadership with additional tactical and operational options requiring some degree of interoperability
This summer, Microsoft’s Innovation Center in Karachi announced that an 11-year-old boy designed a UAV that can fly to 1,500 feet and be armed with small weapons. Such developments are evidence that unmanned technologies are rapidly changing the global security environment. As such, will American policy adapt in time to shape these changes or will the United States be forced to react to the leadership of others? Militaries around the globe are keen to acquire advanced UAV technology and will eventually do so in one of three ways: by developing them indigenously, by acquiring them from non-U.S. foreign suppliers or by purchasing them from the United States. The United States cannot stop this technological proliferation, but it can influence how UAVs are safeguarded and employed by partnering more closely with nations around the globe. The U.S. has both a national security and commercial imperative to pursue such partnerships. UAVs are increasingly vital to defense policy and war planning as well as law enforcement, anti-smuggling, coastline monitoring and border surveillance. From Beijing to Moscow, Tehran to Istanbul, Abu Dhabi to Tel Aviv, there is a fierce competition underway to develop UAV technology and capture export markets. Like fighter aircraft cooperation in the 20th century, UAV cooperation will shape international alliances and military partnerships in the 21st century. The United States also has a vital interest preventing UAVs from being used to deliver weapons of mass destruction. Today, U.S. policy aims to do this through a cautious interpretation of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)—a non-proliferation arrangement established in 1987 to restrict the export of WMD-capable missiles. In 1992, MTCR members decided to treat UAVs with a 500kg payload and 300km range, like ballistic missiles, based on the premise that UAVs require these features to deliver nuclear weapons. These technical parameters are arbitrary. The 500kg payload is supposed to be a minimum size of a viable nuclear weapon. Yet, Harvard’s Belfer Center reports that the minimum weight for a nuclear device is as little as 30 kg. The range restriction is also capricious considering that basic aircraft, like blimps, can travel beyond 300 km. Whatever merit this policy had in 1992, it is illogical and self-defeating in today’s world of proliferated drones. Nor can the MTCR guidelines credibly claim to prevent WMD employment when the regime does not restrict other methods of WMD delivery. These include all manned aircraft and artillery, as well as unconventional mechanisms like delivery by truck or container ship or through improvised nuclear devices. It was reasonable in 1987 to assume that WMDs would be delivered by missiles and similar systems, but that is not the case today, where unconventional, terrorist violence is the dominant form of warfare. Rather than restricting UAV sales, WMD threats would be better addressed by promoting a consensus against attaching WMDs to UAVs. This is not a difficult argument to make. Only an extremely reckless government would allow WMDs to be attached to unmanned systems, given the risk of loss of control. But the best way to ensure that this view becomes the policy of foreign governments is by having the U.S. military cooperate with foreign militaries on UAV tactics, techniques, procedures and doctrine. Such cooperation would encourage end-use monitoring arrangements that prevent diversion of sensitive technology, along with other safeguards. Moreover, ensuring that the United States is the UAV partner of choice is an essential means of maintaining a global balance of military power that promotes peace and stability. The United States also has a clear commercial imperative for expanding its UAV partnerships. As noted by the Congressional Research Service, “much new business is likely to be generated in the [UAV] market, and if U.S. companies fail to capture this market share, European, Russian, Israeli, Chinese or South African companies will.” Chinese officials publicly acknowledge that they are “taking advantage of the hole in the market” created by America’s restrictive export policy. China is now able to fill that hole with UAVs that look remarkably similar to America’s MQ-1B Predator and MQ-9 Reaper (so close that some might wonder where China got the designs). Indian UAV demand is a prime example of what American industry has to lose. The Indian Ministry of Defense reportedly has plans to acquire 3 billion USD worth of UAVs over the next decade. For the United States to maintain its dominance in UAV technology and production, it cannot afford to surrender this kind of market opportunity to foreign industry. Today, the United States is the undisputed leader in UAV design and production, but this isn’t guaranteed to last. A forward thinking approach that reflects today’s realities around UAV capability and demand, which helps engage more deeply partner countries globally, is both logical and essential to U.S. interests.
Two centuries ago, Napoleon warned, "Let China sleep; when she wakes, she will shake the world." Today China has awakened, and the world is beginning to shake. Yet many Americans are still in denial about what China's transfor- mation from agrarian backwater to "the biggest player in the history of the world" means for the United States. What is this book's Big Idea? In a phrase. Thucydidess Trap; When rising power threatens to displace a ruling power, alarm bells should sound: danger ahead. China and the United States are currently on a collision course for war-unless both parties take difficult and painful actions to avert it. As a rapidly ascending China challenges America's accustomed pre- dominance, these two nations risk falling into a deadly trap first identified the 'ancient' Greek historian Thucydides. Writing about a war that devastated the two leading city-states of classical Greece two and a half. millennia ago, he explained: "It was the rise of Athens and the fear that this instilled in Sparta that made war inevitable." That primal insight describes :1 perilous historical pattern. Reviewing the record of the past five hundred years, the Thucydides's Trap Project I direct at Harvard has found sixteen cases in which a major nation's rise has disrupted the position of a dominant state. In the most infamous example, an industrial Germany rattled Britain's established position at the top of the pecking order a century ago. The catastrophic outcome of their competition necessitated a new category of violent conflict: world war. Our research finds that twelve of these rivalries ended in war and four did not - not a comforting ratio for the twenty- first century's most important geopolitical contest. This is not a book about China. It is about the impact of a rising China on the US and the global order. For seven decades since World War II, a rules-based framework led by Washington has defined world order, producing an era without war among great powers. Most people now think of this as normal. Historians call it a rare "Long Peace." To- day, an increasingly powerful China is unraveling this order, throwing into question the peace generations have taken for granted. In 2015, the Atlantic published "The Thucydides Trap: Are the US and China headed for War?" In that essay I argued that this histori- cal metaphor provides the best lens available for illuminating relations between China and the US today. Since then, the concept has ignited considerable debate. Rather than face the evidence and reflect on the uncomfortable but necessary adjustments both sides might make, pol- icy wonlts and presidents alike have constructed a straw man around Thucydides's claim about "inevitability." They have then put a torch to it -arguing that war between Washington and Beijing is not predetermined. At their 2015 summit, Presidents Barack Obama and Xijinping discussed the Trap at length. Obama emphasized that despite the structural stress created by China's rise. "the two countries are capable of managing their disagreements." At the same time, they acknowledged that. in Xi's words. "should major countries time and again make the mistakes of strategic miscalculation, they might create such traps for themselves." I concur: war between the US and China is not inevitable. Indeed, Thucydides would agree that neither was war between Athens and Sparta. Read in context. it is clear that he meant his claim about inevitability as hyperbole: exaggeration for the purpose of emphasis. The point of Thucydides's Trap is neither fatalism nor pessimism. Instead. it points us beyond the headlines and regime rhetoric to recognize the tectonic structural stress that Beijing and Washington must master to construct a peaceful relationship. If Hollywood were making a movie pitting China against the United States on the path to war. central casting could not find two better leading actors than Xi jinping and Donald Trump. Each personifies his country's deep aspirations of national greatness. Much as Xi's appointment as leader (if China in 2012 accentuated the role of the rising power, America': election of Donald Trump in a campaign that vilified China promises a more vigorous response from the ruling power. As personalities, Trump and Xi could not be more different. As protagonists in a struggle to be number one. however, they share por- tentous similarities. Both - Are driven by .1 common ambition: to malte their nation great again. - Identify the nation ruled by the other as the principal obstacle to their dream. - Take pride in their own unique leadership capabilities. ' See themselves playing a central role in revitalizing their nation. ° Have announced daunting domestic agendas that call for radical changes. - Have fired up populist nationalist support to "drain the swamp" of corruption at home and confront attempts by each other to thwart their nation's historic mission. Will the impending clash between these two great nations lead to war? Will Presidents Trump and Xi, or their successors. follow in the tragic footsteps of the leaders of Athens and Sparta or Britain and Ger- many? Or will they find a way to avoid war as effectively as Britain and the US did a century ago or the US and the Soviet Union did through four decades of Cold War? Obviously, no one knows. We can be cer- tain, however, that the dynamic Thucydides identified will intensify in the years ahead. Denying Thucydides’s Trap does not make it less real. Recognizing it does not mean just accepting whatever happens. We owe it to future generations to face one of history’s most brutal tendencies head on and then do everything we can to defy the odds. h, if we only knew." That was the best the Gemian chancellor could offer. Even when a colleague pressed Theobald von Beth- mann Hollweg. he could not explain how his choices. and those of other European statesmen, had led to the most devastating war the world had seen to that point. By the time the slaughter of the Great War finally ended in 1918, the key players had lost all they fought for: the Austro-Hungarian Empire dissolved. the German kaiser ousted, the Russian tsar overthrown, France bled for a generation, and England shorn of its treasure and youth. And for what? If we only knew. Bethmann Hollweg's phrase haunted the president of the United States nearly half a century later. In 1962.]ohn F. Kennedy was forty- five years old and in his second year in oï¬‚ice, but still struggling to get his mind around his responsibilities commander in chief. He knew that his finger was on the button of a nuclear arsenal that could ltill hundreds of millions of human beings in a matter of minutes. But for what? A slogan at the time declared. "Better dead than red." Kennedy rejected that dichotomy as not just facile, but false. "Our goal," as he put it, had to be "not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom." The question was how he and his administration could achieve both. As he vacationecl at the family compound on Cape Cod in the sum- mer of 1902, Kennedy found himself reading The Gun: q/'August, Bar- bara Tuchman's compelling account of the outbrealt of war in 1914. Tuclnnan traced the thoughts and actions of Germany's Kaiser Wil- helm and his chancellor Bethmann Hollweg. Britain's King George and his foreign secretary Edward Grey, Tsar Nicholas, Austro-Hungarian emperor Franz Joseph. and others as they sleepwalked into the abyss. Tuchman argued that none of these men understood the danger they faced. None wanted the war they got. Given the opportunity for a do- -mwm he made. Reflecting on his own responsibilities, Kennedy pledged that if he ever found himself facing his own responsibilities, Kennedy pledged that if ever found himself facing choices that could make the difference between catastrophic war and peace, he would be able to give history a better answer than Bethmann Holloweg’s. Kennedy had no inkling of what lay ahead. In October 1962, just two months after he read Tuchman's book, he faced off against Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in the most dangerous confrontation in hu- man history. The Cuban Missile Crisis began when the United States discovered the Soviets attempting to sneak nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba, a mere ninety miles from Florida. The situation quickly esca- lated from diplomatic threats to an American blockade of the island, military mobilizations in both the US and USSR, and several high- stakes clashes. including the shooting down of an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba. At the height of the crisis, which lasted for a tense thirteen days. Kennedy confided to his brother Robert that he believed the chances it would end in nuclear war were "between one-in-three and even." Nothing historians have discovered since has lengthened ' those odds. Although he appreciated the dangers of his predicament. Kennedy repeatedly made choices he knew actually increased the risk of war, in- cluding nuclear war. He chose to confront Khrushchev publicly (rather than my to resolve the issue privately through diplomatic channels); to draw an unambiguous red line requiring the removal of Soviet missiles (rather than leave himself more wiggle room); to threaten air strikes to destroy the missiles (knowing this could trigger Soviet retaliation against Berlin); and finally, on the penultimate day of the crisis. to give Khrushchev a time-limited ultimatum (that. if rejected. would have re- quired the US to fire the first shot). In each of these choices, Kennedy understood that he was raising the risk that further events and choices by others beyond his control could lead to nuclear bombs destroying American cities. including Washing- ton, DC (where his family stayed throughout the ordeal). For example, when Kennedy elevated the alert level of the American nuclear arse- nal to Defcon II. he made US weapons less vulnerable to a preemptive Soviet attack but simultaneously relaxed a score of safety catches. At Defcon ll. German and Turkish pilots took their seats in NATO fighter bombers loaded with armed nuclear weapons less than two hours away from their targets in the Soviet Union. Since electronic locks on nu- clm weapons had not yet been invented, there was no physical or tech- nica barrier preventing a pilot from deciding to ï¬‚y to Moscow, drop a mic ar bomb, and start World War III. ith no way to wish away these "risks of the uncontrollable," Ken- ned ' and his secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, reached deeply into organizational procedures to minimize accidents or mistakes. De- spit those efforts, historians have identified more than a dozen close calls outside Kennedy's span of control that could have sparked a war. A US ntisubmarine campaign, For example, dropped explosives around Soviet submarines to force them to surface, leading a Soviet captain to believe he was under attack and almost fire his nuclear-armed torpe- does. In another incident, the pilot of a U-2 spy craft mistakenly ï¬‚ew over the Soviet Union, causing Khrushchev to fear that Washington was refining coordinates for a preemptive nuclear attack. If one of these actions had sparked a nuclear World War III. could_]FK explain how his choices contributed to it? Could he give a better answer to an inquisi- tor's question than Bethmann Hollweg did? The complexity of causation in human affairs has vexed philoso- phers, jurists, and social scientists. In analyzing how wars break out, historians focus primarily on proximate or immediate causes. In the case of World War I, these include the assassination of the Hapsburg archduke Franz Ferdinand and the decision by Tsar Nicholas II to mo- bilize Russian forces against the Central Powers. If the Cuban Missile Crisis had resulted in war, the proximate causes could have been the Soviet submarine captain's decision to fire his torpedoes rather than al- low his submarine to sink, or a Turkish pilot's errant choice to fly his nuclear payload to Moscow. Proximate causes for war are undeniably important. But the founder of history believed that the most obvious causes for bloodshed mask even more significant ones. More import- ant than the sparks that lead to war, Thucydides teaches us, are the structural factors that lay its foundations: conditions in which other- wise manageable events can escalate with unforeseeable severity and produce unimaginable consequences. Tl-IUCYDIDES'S TRAP In the most frequently cited one-liner in the study of international re- lations, the ancient Greek historian Thucydides explained, "It was the rise of Athens and the fear that this instilled in Sparta that made war a} . I I .99 Tliucydides wrote about the Peloponnesian War, a conflict that en- gulfcd his homeland, the city-state of Athens, in the fifth century BCB, and which in time came to consume almost the entirety of ancient Greece. A former soldier. Thucydides watched as Athens challenged the dominant Greek power of the day, the martial city-state of Sparta. He observed the outbreak of armed hostilities between the two powers and detailed the fighting's horrific toll. He did not live to see its bitter end. when a weakened Sparta finally vanquished Athens. but it is just as well for him. While others identified an array of contributing causes of the Pelo- ponncsian War. Thucydides went to the heart of the matter. When he turned the spotlight on "the rise of Athens and the fear that this in- stilled in Sparta." he identified a primary driver at the root of some of history's most catastrophic and puzzling wars. Intentions aside, when a rising power threatens to displace a ruling power, the resulting structural stress makes a violent clash the rule, not the exception. It happened between Athens and Sparta in the fifth century ncia, between Germany and Britain a century ago. and almost led to war between the Soviet Union and the United States in the 1950s and 19605. Like so many others. Athens believed its advance to be benign. Over the half century that preceded the conï¬‚ict, it had emerged as a steeple of civilization. Philosophy, drama. architecture, democracy. history, and naval prowess-Athens had it all. beyond anything previously -s'eel'I'Imder the sun. Its rapid development began to threaten Sparta, which had grown accustomed to its position as the dominant power on the Peloponnese. As Athenian confidence and pride grew, so too did its demands for respect and expectations that arrangements be revised to reflect new realities of power. These were, Thucydides tells us, natural reactions to its changing station. How could Athenians not believe that their interests deserved more weight? How could Athenians not expect that they should have greater inï¬‚uence in resolving differences? But it was also natural. Thucydides explained. that Spartans should see the Athenian claims as unreasonable, and even ungrateful. Who, Spartans rightly asked. provided the security environment that allowed Athens to ï¬‚ourish? As Athens swelled with a growing sense of its own importance, and felt entitled to greater say and sway, Sparta reacted with insecurity. fear. and a determination to defend the status quo. Similar dynamics can be found in a host of other settings, indeed even in families. When a young man's adolescent surge poses the prospect that he will overshadow his older sibling (or even his father), what do we expect? Should the allocation of bedrooms. or closet space, or seat- ing be adjusted to reflect relative size as well as age? In alpha-dominated species like gorillas, as a potential successor grows larger and stronger, both the pack leader and the wannabe prepare for a showdown. In businesses, when disruptive technologies allow upstart companies like Apple. Google. or Uber to break quickly into new industries. the re- sult is often a bitter competition that forces established companies like : ifliiexpvlett-Packard, Microsoft. or taxi operators to adapt their business models -or perish. Thucydides's Trap refers to the natural, inevitable discombobulation that occurs when a rising power threatens to displace a ruling power. This can happen in any sphere. But its implications are most dangerous in international affairs. For just as the original instance of Thucydides's Trap resulted in a war that brought ancient Greece to its knees, this phenomenon has haunted diplomacy in the millennia since. Today it has set the world's two biggest powers on a path to a cataclysm nobody wants, bud which they may prove unable to avoid. ARE THE US AND CHINA DESTINED FOR WAR? The world has never seen anything like the rapid, tectonic shift in the global balance of power created by the rise of China. If the US were a corporation. it would have accounted for 50 percent of the global eco- nomic market in the years immediately after World War II. By 1980, that had declined to 22 percent. Three decades of double-digit Chi- nese growth has reduced that US share to 16 percent today. If current trends continue, the US share of global economic output will decline further over the next three decades to 'ust ll rcent. Over this same J P' criod, China's share of the global economy will have soared from 2 P 8 Y percent in 1980 to 18 percent in 2016, well on its way to 30 percent in 2040. China's economic development is transforming it into a formida- ble political and military competitor. During the Cold War. as the US mounted clumsy responses to Soviet provocations, a sign in the Penta- gon said: "lf we ever faced a real enemy, we would be in deep trouble." China is a serious potential enemy. The possibility that the United States and China could find them- selves at war appears as unlikely as it would be unwise. The centennials recalling World War l, however, have reminded us of man's capacity for folly. When we say that war is "inconceivable." is this a statement about what is possible in the world-or only about what our limited minds can conceive? As far ahead as the eye can see. the defining question about global order is whether China and the US can escape Thucydides's Trap. Most contests that fit this pattern have ended badly. Over the past five hun- drcd years, in sixteen cases a major rising power has threatened to dis- place a ruling power. In twelve of those, the result was war. The four cases that avoided this outcome did so only because of huge, painful adjustments in attitudes and actions on the part of challenger and chal- lenged alilte. The United States and China can likewise avoid war, but only if they can internalize two difficult truths. First. on the current trajectory. war between the US and China in the decades ahead is not just possible, but much more likely than currently recognized. Indeed. on the historical record. war lS IUOT? add to they h tainly major likely than not. By underestimating the danger, moreover, we the risk. If leaders in Beijing and Washington keep doing what ave done for the past decade. the US and China will almost cer- wind up at war. Second, war is not inevitable. History shows that ruling powers can manage relations with rivals. even those that threaten to overtake them, without triggering a war. The record of those successes, as well as the failures. offers many lessons for statesmen today. As George Santayana noted, only those who fail to study history are condemned to repeat it. The chapters that follow describe the origins of Thucydides's Trap, explore its dynamics. and explain its implications for the present con- test between the US and China. Part One provides a succinct summary of the rise of China. Everyone knows about China's growth but few have realized its magnitude or its consequences. To paraphrase former Czech president Vaclav Havel. it has happened so quickly that we have not yet had time to be astonished. Part Two locates recent developments in US-China relations on the broader canvas of history. This not only helps us understand current events. but also provides clues about where events are trending. Our review stretches back 2,500 years, to the time when the rapid growth of Athens shocked a dominant martial Sparta and led to the Pelopon- nesian War. Key examples from the past 500 years also provide insights into the ways in which the tension between rising and ruling powers can tilt the chessboard toward war. The closest analogue to the current standoff--Germany's challenge to Britain's ruling global empire be- fore World War I--should give us all pause. Part Three asks whether we should see current trends in America's relations with China as a gathering storm of similar proportions. Daily media reports of China's "aggressive" behavior and unwillingness to accept the "intemational rules-based order" established by the US af- -!El"W6l'l'd War I] describe incidents and accidents reminiscent of 1914. At the same time. a dose of self-awareness is due. If China were "just lilte us" when the US burst into the twentieth century brimming with confidence that the hundred years ahead would be an American era. the rivalry would be even more severe, and war even harder to avoid. If it actually followed in America's footsteps, we should expect to see Chi- nese troops enforcing Beijing's will from Mongolia to Australia, just as Theodore Roosevelt molded "our hemisphere" to his China is following a different trajectory than did the United States during its own surge to primacy. But in many aspects of China's rise, we can hear echoes. What does President Xi_|inping's China want? In one line: to make China great again. The deepest aspiration of over a billion Chinese citizens is to make their nation not only rich, but also pow- erful. Indeed, their goal is a China so rich and so powerful that other nations will have no choice but to recognize its interests and give it the respect that it deserves. The sheer scale and ambition of this "China Dream" should disabuse us of any notion that the contest between (jliina and the United States will naturally subside as China becomes a "responsible stakeholder." This is especially so given what my former colleague Sam Huntington famously called a "clash of civilizations," a historical disjunction in which fundamentally different Chinese and American values and traditions make rapprochement between the two powers even more elusive. While resolution of the present rivalry may seem difficult to foresee. actual armed conflict appears distant. But is it? In truth, the paths to war are more varied and plausible (and even mundane) than we want to believe. From current confrontations in the South China Sea, the East China Sea, and cyberspace, to a trade conflict that spirals out of control, it is frighteningly easy to develop scenarios in which Ameri- can and Chinese soldiers are killing each other. Though none of these scenarios seem likely, when we recall the unintended consequences of the assassination of the Hapsburg archdulte or of l(hrushchev's nuclear adventure in Cuba, we are reminded of just how narrow the gap is be- tween "unlikely" and "impossible." Part Four explains why war is not inevitable. Most of the policy community and general public are naively complacent about the possi- bility of war. Fatalists. meanwhile, see an irresistible force rapidly ap- proaching an immovable object. Neither side has it right. If leaders in both societies will study the successes and failures of the past, they will find a rich source of clues from which to fashion a strategy that can meet each nation's essential interests without war. The return to prominence of a 5,000-year-old civilization with 1.4 billion people is not a problem to be fixed. It is a condin'on-a chronic condition that will have to be managed over a generation. Success will require not just a new slogan, more frequent presidential summits. or additional meetings of departmental working groups. Managing this relationship without war will demand sustained attention, week by Wcclc. at the highest levels in both governments. It will require a depth of mutual understanding not seen since the Henry Kissinger-Zhou En- lai conversations that reestablished US-China relations in the 19705. Most significant, it will mean more radical changes in attitudes and ac- tions by leaders and the public alilte than anyone has yet undertaken. To escape Thucydides's Trap. we must be willing to think the unthinkable -:md imagine the unimaginable. Avoiding Thucydides's Trap in this case will require nothing less than bending the arc of history.
The G20 Summit The G20 Summit was first called together in November 2008 by US President George W. Bush in response to the global financial crisis, which had started earlier that year. As an annual meeting of key global leaders from North and South, East and West, it has since then become an integral feature of the global multilateral architecture. Indeed, it can be seen as the apex of all multilateral consultation, coordination, and cooperation efforts, although this is not necessarily the accepted view of those excluded from the G20 summit forum, and by those who would rather see the UN and its governing bodies serve as the apex of the global governance system. From its initial, overall successful focus on coordinating an effective crisis response, which included a concerted fiscal stimulus effort and initiatives to strengthen global financial regulation, the G20 Summit has over the years taken on a bewildering range of topics: In its 2017 com - pliance report, the G20 Research Group of the University of Toronto noted 213 specific commitments in the Hang - zhu Summit of 201680 and the Communiqué of the 2017 G20 summit in Hamburg covered 14 pages, not including 14 “agreed documents” on various action plans (including one on “countering marine litter”), statements of princi - ple (including one on “countering corruption in customs”) and initiatives (including one on “#eSkills4Girls”). And it is accompanied by a plethora of parallel efforts designed to reach out to and bring in the perspectives of a broad range of stakeholders, including business (B20), labor (L20), youth (Y20), and think tanks (T20).81 There can be little question that geopolitical trends are crucial to the G20. Creation of the G20 summit (largely superseding the G8/G7 summit) was timely. It provided an opportunity for leaders in face-to-face meetings to deal not only with the financial crisis of 2008/9, but also with the subsequently growing geopolitical tensions, following the Russian annexation of Crimea and engagement in East - ern Ukraine, the continuing crises in the Middle East, the threat of North Korea, and the rising wave of refugees. But these tensions also limit the effectiveness of the G20 in focusing on substantive issues of global finance, economic growth, development and the environment. However, it is worth noting that the G20 Summit involves much more than the meeting of leaders. Besides the above-mentioned stakeholder forums, the G20 process involves intensive consultations year-round among concerned government officials at senior levels, including key ministers. It is this part of the process which is perhaps most suited to help bridge growing gaps in geo-political perspectives of different G20 member countries.82 Domestic political trends have a major impact on the G20 Summit agenda and outcomes. In recent years, domestic political stalemate in many countries (including Europe, the US, and Japan) has limited the ability of lead - ers to engage constructively at the G20 summits, while more recently the election of President Trump in the US has led to significant tensions in the 2017 summit process, especially around the topics of trade and climate change (see above). There is no doubt that the domestic political trends – towards more nationalist, populist, and anti-democratic positions, as against continued adherence to or move toward globalist, liberal, democratic principles – will be critical for the ability of the G20 to forge effective responses to global economic, social, and environmental challenges.
This reluctance to transfer U.S. drones harms U.S. interests in tangible ways. When U.S. partners buy Chinese instead of American drones, the United States loses an opportunity to deepen its defense relationships and interoperability becomes more difficult. Blocking U.S. companies from competing in the global marketplace also stymies American competitiveness and innovation, making it harder for the United States to maintain its technological edge in this rapidly changing arena. Restricting U.S. sales perversely promotes sales from other nations, since partners who would prefer U.S. drones are forced to turn elsewhere. The Trump administration should engage in targeted, conditional exports to key partners.
Last Thursday, the State Department announced its updated export policy for unmanned aerial systems, popularly known as drones. While the White House framed the new plan as a means to promote American industry, the guidelines — which make it easier for the United States to sell drones to foreign allies — will almost certainly enhance U.S. national security. By exporting drones, which are on the wish lists of militaries around the world, Washington can strengthen ties with allies, enhance burden-sharing and interoperability during coalition operations, and prevent strategic competitors like China from gaining influence among Washington’s security partners.
The U.S. monopoly on drones has ended. More than 30 nations already have or are developing armed drones, and at least 90 nations, as well as some non-state actors, possess unarmed drones. Further drone proliferation is inevitable. The technology has already spread widely, with countries such as Israel and China selling drones on the global market, as well as indigenous production increasing in a number of countries. The United States must take proactive measures to come to grips with an increasingly drone-saturated world.
China’s proliferation of armed drones benefits their strategic vision, protecting their investments and interests, and provides a foothold. Meanwhile countries are willing to accept increased links with China in exchange for a new capability and tool for combating threats. This willingness is only magnified by economic and political isolation from other options. The capability gap exists and will not disappear – and China will be there to fill it with their armed drones.
When the United States has held back from transferring drones abroad, even to key partners, China has stepped in to fill the void. China has transferred their Reaper-class CH-4 drone to Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq. Many of China’s sales have been armed. (The MTCR does not distinguish between armed vs. unarmed drones.) China has sold armed drones to Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Turkmenistan, and the United Arab Emirates.44 In fact, every international transfer of an armed drone to date with the exception of the U.S. transfer to the United Kingdom has been from China. Over time, this is likely to change as the United States and Israel transfer more armed drones abroad as well. In addition to the pending U.S. transfer to Italy, Israel reportedly has approved but not yet delivered transfers of armed drones to Germany and India.45
Armed drones have become an increasingly common sight in the skies around the Middle East in recent years, notably in the war zones of Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen. But rather than the most advanced Western technology being used, it is a combination of Chinese imports and home-grown alternatives that are being deployed by local armed forces.
As part of U.S. plans to share unmanned aerial systems and accompanying technology with allies, the Navy has reached agreement with Canada for the first international sale of RQ-21A Blackjacks. The Navy said it expects to deliver one of the systems to Canada sometime in 2017. Each Insitu-made Blackjack system includes five of the aircraft along with two ground control stations and launch and recovery equipment. The twin-tailed Blackjack is 8.2 feet long with a 16-foot wingspan. It has an open, modular design that allows for a variety of payloads and, once launched from a catapult, can stay aloft for 10 to 12 hours, the Navy said in an announcement. The announcement didn’t mention a dollar amount for the agreement, but in July 2015 the Navy and Marines a $78million contract with Insitu for six of the Blackjack systems. The Marines eventually plan to have 32 of the systems; the Navy 25. “We are very pleased to have our Canadian allies and neighbors as our first Foreign Military Sales case and look forward to helping them grow their small tactical UAS capability and ensure maximum interoperability with our assets, if desired,” said Col[onel]. Eldon Metzger, program manager for the Navy and Marine Corps Small Tactical Unmanned Aircraft Systems Program Office (PMA-263), which manages the Blackjack program. It catapult-launch system allows the system to take off without a runway, so it can be used both in the field and aboard ships for tactical reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition at sea and on land. The United States has long had a virtual monopoly on military drones, but announced in February 2015 that it would begin to allow sales of UAS including some armed versions, to partner nations. At the time, the State Department cited national security as one reason for the decision, noting the advantage of allies having interoperable systems. Economics also played a role, as other nations such as China and Israel are looking to break into the military and commercial drone markets. State said that, despite opening up sales to other countries, any sale would have to follow strict controls set by the Foreign Military Sales program and other factors, such as those under the international Missile Technology Control Regime (the long flight ranges of UAS like the Predator put them in the same class as missiles for these purposes). In November, the State Department approved the possible sale of up to three high-altitude, long-range RQ-4 Block 30 Global Hawks to Japan for ISR, and the possible sale of MQ-9 Reapers, which also have strike capability, to Italy. Italy is also home to NATO’s Alliance Ground Surveillance program, which is expected to have five Global Hawks that could provide ISR for 15 countries. South Korea also have been has been approved to possible sales and the U.K.
U.S. forces are at increasing risk as China and other nations sell more armed drones to anyone with the money to pay for them, and restrictive U.S. export policies may be making the situation worse, says a new report delivered to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. The RAND Corp. report says that drones produced by unfriendly nations will pose a “growing threat to U.S. and allied military operations,” in the near future, as China, Russia, and Iran recognize the power of unmanned platforms, making it certain that in future conflicts, “U.S. forces will have to cope with adversaries equipped with different types and sizes of UAVs, both armed and unarmed.” In some ways, the future is now. In 2017, Iranian-made drones dropped small munitions near U.S. forces in Syria, forcing American aircraft to knock them out of the sky. Iranian drones have also buzzed American warships in the Persian Gulf, and Iranian-made unmanned suicide boats have targeted Saudi warships off the coast of Yemen. American export restrictions on the sale of large long-range drones have allowed China and Iran to step in and fill the gap left open by US policies. Beijing has really stepped up its efforts to capture the market in ISR and strike drones, making plans to build a drone production facility in Saudi Arabia, and actively courting countries spurned by the American restrictions. Exports of American-made drones have primarily been restricted to the handful of allies who have signed the Missile Technology Control Regime, a consortium of 35 nations that sets limits based on range and payload. At issue are Category I drones, which can carry a payload of 500 kilograms for more than 300 kilometers. Under the MTCR, these systems are subject to a “strong presumption of denial” for transfer. But changes being proposed by Washington seek to open new categories of drones available for sale in part by focusing on speed instead of range— allowing drones that can fly less than 650 kilometers per hour to be capable of being shipped to international partners. U.S. partners such as Jordan, the UAE, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia — all denied requests to purchase drones from the United States — have turned to China, which is not an MTCR member. Chinese CH-4 medium range drones are already stationed at the Saudi’s Jirzan Regional airport, not far from where UAE-operated Predator drones operate from the same air base. Egypt has also purchased the system, along with the Medium-Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) Wing Loong drone.The UAE has also taken to selling drones to Russia and offering them to other countries. Overall, China has sold advanced drones to at least nine nations. China has signed an agreement to establish a UAV manufacturing plant in Saudi Arabia to produce up to 300 new drones — some of them Category I. China and the UAE are not only marketing their own drones, but also offering to build factories for co-production. Even MTCR member states appear to be edging away from the protocol, with Germany codeveloping a unmanned system with Qatar, and Italy making plans to export a long-range system to the UAE. The Trump administration has been loosening controls on U.S. exports of advanced drones, allowing General Atomics sell some advanced drones to India, and lifting some other restrictions on arms transfers overall this spring. The White House has for months been circulating what it calls its Arms Transfer Initiative, which would further slash red tape in military sales to allies, speeding up the process and making more weapons more readily available for export. The Rand report concluded that while the MTCR has been effective in limiting the proliferation of large drones, “the availability of these vehicles from non-MTCR nations has significantly eroded the MTCR’s efficacy to limit the proliferation of large UAVs,” while also hurting U.S. drone makers who are restricted in who they can sell to. Ellen Lord, head of Pentagon acquisition, told reporters at a special operations conference in Florida last month that she wants to “promote allied readiness by enhancing military capacity through targeting improvements in foreign military sales.” The glacial pace of the U.S. government in approving sales means that some allies look elsewhere, telling American officials that “we’re going to go with the Russian alternative, we’re going to go with the Chinese alternative because we know we can get it quickly,” Lord said. “We know that it might fail 80 to 90 percent of the time, but we will have something. That’s a missed opportunity for the U.S. and we’re going to make sure we do everything possible to improve upon that.”
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates — High above Yemen’s rebel-held city of Hodeida, a drone controlled by Emirati forces hovered as an SUV carrying a top Shiite Houthi rebel official turned onto a small street and stopped, waiting for another vehicle in its convoy to catch up. Seconds later, the SUV exploded in flames, killing Saleh al-Samad, a top political figure. The drone that fired that missile in April was not one of the many American aircraft that have been buzzing across the skies of Yemen, Iraq and Afghanistan since Sept. 11, 2001. It was Chinese. Across the Middle East, countries locked out of purchasing U.S.-made drones due to rules over excessive civilian casualties are being wooed by Chinese arms dealers, who are world's main distributor of armed drones. "The Chinese product now doesn't lack technology, it only lacks market share," said Song Zhongping, a Chinese military analyst and former lecturer at the People's Liberation Army Rocket Force University of Engineering. "And the United States restricting its arms exports is precisely what gives China a great opportunity." The sales are helping expand Chinese influence across a region vital to American security interests. "It's a hedging strategy and the Chinese will look to benefit from that," said Douglas Barrie, an airpower specialist at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. "I think the Chinese are far less liable to be swayed by concerns over civilian casualties," he said. At the start of the year, a satellite passing over southern Saudi Arabia photographed U.S.-made surveillance drones at an airfield, alongside Chinese-manufactured armed ones. According to the Center for the Study of the Drone at New York's Bard College, that was the first documented example of the two drone systems being used in the war in Yemen. The country has emerged as a "sort of a testing ground for these strike-capable drones," said Dan Gettinger, the co-director of the Center for the Study of the Drone. "There's a rapid turnaround from delivery to deployment." U.S. drones were first used in Yemen to kill suspected al-Qaida militants in 2002. One of the biggest Chinese exports is the Cai-Hong, or Rainbow, series made by the state-owned China Aerospace Science and Technology Corp., or CASC, the largest contractor for the Chinese space program. CASC's CH-4 and CH-5 models are on a par with San Diego-based General Atomics' Predator and Reaper drones, and much cheaper. Independent analysts say the Chinese models lag behind their American counterparts but the technology is good enough to justify the price tag, which might be half or less. A CASC executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to journalists, said cutting-edge U.S. models like Boeing Co.'s Stingray, introduced this year for the U.S. Navy, still hold a technological advantage. And while price is an advantage, so too is a more relaxed attitude toward how drones are used, said Ulrike Franke, an expert on drones and policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations. Since 2014, China has sold more than 30 CH-4′s to countries including Saudi Arabia and Iraq in deals worth over $700 million, according to CASC. Ten countries are currently in negotiations to purchase the CH-4, according to the firm. Since 2014, China has sold more than 30 CH-4′s to countries including Saudi Arabia and Iraq in deals worth over $700 million, according to CASC. Ten countries are currently in negotiations to purchase the CH-4, according to the firm. During President Xi Jinping’s five years in power, China has stepped up spending on stealth fighters and aircraft carriers for its own military, while boosting sales of advanced equipment such as attack submarines to close allies like Pakistan. China still lags behind the U.S., Russia, France, and Germany in total arms sales but it's catching up. Chinese arms exports rose by 38 percent between 2008-12 and 2013-17, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, which tracks the global arms trade. Mounting criticism over the rising civilian death toll in Yemen prompted the U.S. to impose restrictions on drone sales, forcing foreign countries to go through the U.S. government to buy armed drones, including those with laser-guidance systems. The Washington-based New America Foundation estimates more than 240 drone strikes in Yemen have killed more than 1,300 people, including at least 111 civilians. But with China's drone sales booming, there's growing pressure from U.S. arms makers to remove restrictions to let them catch up. After some U.S. lawmakers urged President Donald Trump to loosen controls and let General Atomics sell its armed Reapers to Jordan and the UAE, the administration on April 19 permitted U.S. manufacturers to directly market and sell drones, including armed versions. The government must still approve and license the sales, which are also contingent on human rights and proliferation reviews and congressional authorization. General Atomics did not respond to a request for comment. China doesn’t routinely announce arms sales like the U.S. and others, but a review of drone spottings gives some indication of who its customers are. In Iraq in October 2015, the country's then-defense minister inspected a CH-4 drone at an air base in the city of Kut. — Chinese armed drones have been operating at Jordan's Zarqa Airport, at an air base in Pakistan and from bases in Egypt in the Sinai Peninsula and near its border with Libya, according to satellite photos analyzed by the Center for the Study of the Drone. — Satellite photographs taken of a mysterious air base in the United Arab Emirates' deep south — a desert area known as the Empty Quarter — appear to show three Wing Loong IIs, IHS Jane's Defense Weekly reported in January. — Two CH-4s were spotted by satellite alongside surveillance-only Predators purchased by the UAE at Jizan Regional Airport in southern Saudi Arabia, near the kingdom's border with Yemen, according to the Center for the Study of the Drone. — Outside of the Mideast, Nigeria has used Chinese armed drones against the Islamic extremist group Boko Haram.
Polarization within our nation and tumultuous relations within our alliances risk making the United States look vulnerable to our adversaries. While some of these divisions are real, the United States and its allies are in fact more strategically aligned in grand strategy – enjoying the support of Republicans and Democrats – than they have been since 9/11, if not 1989. Our nation and its closest friends agree that the great challenge of the 21st century will be the competition between the free world and authoritarian corrupt state-led capitalism, chief among them China and Russia. The National Security Strategy and the National Defense Strategy clearly articulate this great power geopolitical competition, arguing that our alliances provide “a durable, asymmetric strategic advantage that no competitor or rival can match.” However, we have much work to do to implement policies to achieve this strategy. Specifically, we are not as focused on how to bolster our alliances as a key component of our strategy to compete effectively. To better address the Russian threat, the United States needs to bolster its military presence in Europe to establish what the Atlantic Council Task Force on US Force Posture in Europe calls “permanent deterrence,” especially in the Baltics, Poland, and the Black Sea region. Our allies need to be part of this new force posture, our policies need to prioritize arms and technology sales and transfers to our allies, and any divisions among us cannot become opportunities for Russia to weaken NATO cohesion or resolve.
With the market shifting away from it, the U.S. has shown signs of changing its approach and relaxing its rules. In April, the State Department unveiled a new policy on the export of unmanned aerial systems which it said would remove barriers to the global market “and avoid ceding export opportunities to competitors where such self-imposed restrictions are unwarranted.” To date, however, that hasn’t led to any reported sales to the Middle East.
A key thrust of the policy will be to lower barriers to sales of smaller hunter-killer drones that carry fewer missiles and travel shorter distances than larger models such as the iconic Predator drone, the sources said.
At least one buyer of China’s copy of the famous Predator is none too happy. Jordan is selling off its fleet of CH-4B “Rainbow” drones after owning them for just two years. The Middle Eastern kingdom was reportedly not happy with the drones’ performance and is seeking to unload them at auction.
Peter Navarro, White House National Trade Council head, said this change will allow allies and partners “to more easily obtain” American security goods, which in turn improves the security of the Untied States while “reducing” the need for them to buy Chinese and Russian systems.
The United States dropped some restrictions on sales of its advanced drones in order to reinforce the armies of its allies and compete with China on the world arms market.
The Senate failed to pass two resolutions Thursday intended to block arms sales to Bahrain and Qatar. The resolutions, introduced by Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), are part of a broader effort to curb the president’s authority on U.S. foreign policy. The measure to block arms sales to Bahrain failed in a 43-56 vote, while the effort to block arms sales to Qatar failed 42-57. Paul’s resolutions come amid growing bipartisan frustration over the Trump administration’s close ties to Saudi Arabia, particularly after the murder of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi. The CIA believes Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman directed Khashoggi’s killing. Paul is also working with Sen. Bob Menendez (D-N.J.), ranking member of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, to block arms sales to Saudi Arabia. Before the vote, Paul said in a floor speech that the Middle East is a “hot cauldron” and the United States should approve arms sales based on the behavior of other countries. “We are told that because of Iran’s threat, the U.S. must accept selling arms to anyone who opposes Iran, even bone saw-wielding countries brazen enough to kill a dissident in a foreign consulate,” Paul said, referring to the murder of Khashoggi. “What would happen if we just said no?” Paul, who regularly espouses a noninterventionist foreign policy, further slammed the United States’ role in the ongoing war in Yemen and said members are so focused on opposing Iran that “they can’t understand that they’re giving weapons to people who are giving weapons to enemies of the United States.” The measures faced significant opposition from members of the Republican caucus. Sen. Tom Cotton (R-Ark.) defended the United States’ selling of arms to Bahrain and Qatar, noting that the sales would bring in $3 billion to the United States and increase American safety abroad. He also warned against Iran’s ongoing threat to the region. “It’s essential we support our Gulf partners during this dangerous time so they can defend themselves from Iranian aggression and its proxies,” Cotton said. “Instead of helping Qatar and Bahrain to confront a common adversary, some of my colleagues want to hang them out to dry.” The votes split the Republican and Democratic caucuses. In addition to Paul, Republican Sens. Mike Lee of Utah and Jerry Moran of Kansas joined 40 Democrats in voting in favor of the resolution disapproving of arms sales to Bahrain. Republican Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, along with Lee and Paul, voted in favor of the Qatar resolution, while Moran voted against it.
This week in Washington, there was a major split between the two major parties on the issue of US strategy toward Yemen. While few would agree that Washington’s current policies are conducive to peace in Yemen, there are major differences between lawmakers as to how best to recalibrate US policy. On March 6, the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa held a public hearing on “The Humanitarian Crisis in Yemen: Addressing Current Political and Humanitarian Challenges.” The Senate Foreign Relations Committee (SFRC) later held a nomination hearing for the two individuals tapped to represent the United States in Saudi Arabia and Iraq, and the nominees were also asked a host of questions about the situation in Yemen. Finally, on March 11, the Senate received a briefing from the UN Special Envoy for Yemen Martin Griffiths. The responses to these briefings clearly illustrate the fault lines separating Democrats and Republicans on this critical issue. Partisan Disconnect There is quite clearly a partisan divide on the issue of the United States’ role in Yemen; members of each party are drawing completely different conclusions from the situation there. During the House subcommittee hearing, Democrats gravitated toward their preferred witnesses—in this case, three human rights and development experts—to buttress the liberals’ arguments that the United States’ role in this human-made humanitarian crisis is morally reprehensible. In addition, they believe that it could prove to be a grave national security risk as US support for Saudi and Emirati bombing sorties could breed anti-Americanism among Yemeni civilians. Republicans, for their part, were not necessarily apathetic to the crisis decimating Yemeni society, but their humanitarian concerns seemed second only to their apprehensions about the consequences of ending US support. They focused on the use of military force as a way to undermine the Houthi rebel group—to which Republicans repeatedly referred as an Iranian proxy despite legitimate evidence suggesting that Tehran’s support for the Houthis is more of a cheap strategic investment against arch foe Saudi Arabia than any Hezbollah-like project on the part of Iran—and extremist groups like al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. Throughout the briefings, the parties stuck to their respective corners and seemed only to seek information that was congruent with their preconceived notions. The Democrats’ witnesses—Dafna Rand (Mercy Corps), Jeremy Konyndyk (Center for Global Development), and Radhya Almutawakel (Mwatana for Human Rights)—all focused on the humanitarian aspects of the war in Yemen and ultimately argued in favor of ceasing US support for the Saudi-led coalition’s war in Yemen, including ending arms sales to Riyadh. The House GOP was more interested in the analysis by Katherine Zimmerman (American Enterprise Institute), who argued that ending US support for the anti-Houthi coalition’s efforts would undermine US national security and provide an opening for the Houthis and Iran to entrench themselves in any Yemeni peace settlement that may result from the UN-led peace efforts. Meanwhile in the SFRC nomination hearing, John Abizaid, the nominee to represent Washington in Riyadh, and Matthew Tueller, the ambassadorial nominee for Iraq, appeared reflexively anti-Iran (in fact, that is reportedly why Tueller was nominated to represent the United States in Baghdad). This was clear in both nominees’ assessments of the situation in Yemen, much to the delight of the Republican members at the dais. Ultimately, Tueller—who was asked a number of questions about Yemen as he has been ambassador there since 2014—and Abizaid painted Iran and the Houthi rebels as the actors most responsible for the ongoing humanitarian crisis and recommended maintaining strong relations with Saudi Arabia. What Will Congress Do? Clearly, the two parties have fundamentally different priorities in mind for US policy, resulting in separate and almost incompatible solutions. Democrats in both chambers support ending US assistance to the Saudi-led coalition’s war efforts in Yemen and they argue that sufficient pressure on the Saudis and Emiratis would force the two countries to become more serious about negotiating a political solution with the Houthis based on the UN plan to end the fighting. Most, though not all, Republicans reject this idea and argue instead that only steadfast military support for the coalition can bring the Houthis to the negotiating table while simultaneously helping minimize the civilian casualties that have been a tragic feature of this war. Though the House version of the War Powers Resolution was stymied in the Senate due to its incompatibility with the chamber’s rules, the Senate is likely to vote on its own version of the joint resolution (S.J. Res. 7) this week, perhaps as soon as March 13. Should it pass, the House would have the opportunity to pass the Senate version and then avoid the procedural snafu that resulted in the legislative death of H.J. Res. 37 in the first place. But ahead of any Senate vote, GOP leaders—particularly SFRC Chairman James Risch (R-Idaho)—has looked to unify the Senate GOP and quell any rebellious Republicans who might help S.J. Res. 7 pass (like the joint resolution the chamber passed late last Congress). After the Senate briefing with UN Envoy Griffiths, Risch put out a statement that read as a caution against doing anything that might upset Griffiths’s shuttle diplomacy, saying he and his colleagues hear “Martin Griffiths’ assessments of U.S. efforts to support the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen, and how congressional actions may influence critical peace negotiations. We all want to see an end to this conflict and humanitarian crisis and ensure that the Yemeni people can address their needs. It must be noted that Iran has been a destabilizing force in this conflict.” Risch, who seeks to subtly manage intra-caucus fighting, seemed to be warning colleagues that voting on legislation that might upset or pressure the Saudis could potentially disrupt the peace negotiations and frustrate UN efforts. This is despite others’ argument that it could, and indeed does, have the opposite effect. In light of these developments, the chances of the War Powers Resolution becoming law are nearly nonexistent. Even if it passes the Senate—which is no longer a guarantee due to a greater GOP majority and strong lobbying against the measure by the White House—and the House, there likely will not be enough votes to override President Trump’s promised veto. Moving forward, public pressure from Congress (e.g., hearings and symbolic votes on resolutions and joint resolutions), alongside holds on arms sales to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Egypt, and other members of the anti-Houthi coalition, will be the only realistic forms of punishment Congress will have at its disposal as long as the White House holds steadfast in its support for Riyadh.
U.S. drone export policy has overly prioritized limiting proliferation at the expense of other U.S. interests, including maintaining a technological advantage over competitors, improving the capabilities of key partners, and shaping the behavior of how others use drones. To date, the United States has sought to slow drone proliferation by restricting U.S. drone exports, particularly armed drones and larger drones that fall under Category I of the MTCR. This has not significantly slowed drone proliferation, however. Other nations can still purchase drones on the global market from countries such as China or Israel.
Drone technology continues to advance, driven by both military and commercial investment. This not only affects drones’ capabilities and military relevance but also potentially reshapes proliferation in terms of who can purchase, develop, manufacture, or operate drones. Advances in drone technology are leading to next-generation systems that operate more like traditional military and commercial aircraft, as well as systems that exploit novel operational concepts such as swarming. Drone policy must be adaptive to technological change; otherwise at best it will be irrelevant, unable to impact the spread of uninhabited systems or shape their use, and at worst it will be counterproductive to U.S. interests.
Adapt Export and Counter-proliferation Policy to Keep Pace with Changing Technology Export policy: The Obama administration’s approach of strictly limiting drone exports, including to close partners such as Jordan, has been counterproductive and harms American interests. The diverse global marketplace means that drones are proliferating regardless of what the United States does. When U.S. partners buy Chinese instead of American drones, however, the United States loses an opportunity to deepen its defense relationships and interoperability becomes more difficult. Blocking U.S. companies from competing in the global marketplace also stymies American competitiveness and innovation, making it harder for the United States to maintain its technological edge in this rapidly changing arena. Even worse, the current process perversely promotes sales from other nations, since partners who would prefer U.S. drones are forced to turn elsewhere. While in its final years the Obama administration moved to increase exports, the current case-by-case process for review within the U.S. bureaucracy is slow and marred by vague guidance and competing priorities.
Yet if ever there were a time to get serious about the coming revolution in military affairs, it is now. There is an emerging consensus that the United States’ top defense-planning priority should be contending with great powers with advanced militaries, primarily China, and that new technologies, once intriguing but speculative, are now both real and essential to future military advantage. Senior military leaders and defense experts are also starting to agree, albeit belatedly, that when it comes to these threats, the United States is falling dangerously behind.
The catalogue of weapon systems is just one revelation in the classified report, which was obtained by the French investigative news organization Disclose and is being published in full by The Intercept, Disclose, and four other French media organizations. The report also harshly criticizes Saudi military capabilities in Yemen, describing the Saudis as operating “ineffectively” and characterizing their efforts to secure their border with Yemen as “a failure.” And it suggests that U.S. assistance with Saudi targeting in Yemen may go beyond what has previously been acknowledged.
The continued proliferation of cruise missiles and UAVs poses a growing threat to the United States, its forces overseas, and its allies. Most countries already possess cruise missiles, UAVs, or related technology, and many are expected to develop or obtain more sophisticated systems in the future. The dual-use nature of many of the components of cruise missiles and UAVs also raises the prospect that terrorists could develop rudimentary systems that could pose additional security threats to the United States. Because this technology is widely available throughout the world, the United States works in concert with other countries through multilateral export control regimes whose limited effectiveness could be enhanced by adopting recommendations we have made in previous reports. U.S. export controls may not be sufficient to prevent cruise missile and UAV proliferation and to ensure compliance with license conditions. Because some key dual-use components can be acquired without an export license, it is difficult for the export control system to limit or track their use. Moreover, current U.S. export controls may not prevent proliferation by nonstate actors, such as certain terrorists, who operate in countries that are not currently restricted under missile proliferation regulations. Furthermore, the U.S. government seldom uses its end-use monitoring programs to verify compliance with the conditions placed on items that could be used to develop cruise missiles or UAVs. As a result, the U.S. government does not have sufficient information to know whether recipients of these exports are effectively safeguarding equipment and technology and, thus, protecting U.S. national security and nonproliferation interests. The challenges to U.S. nonproliferation efforts in this area, coupled with the absence of end-use monitoring programs by several foreign governments for their exports of cruise missiles or UAVs, raise questions about how nonproliferation tools are keeping pace with the changing threat.
Shape Perceptions of Legitimacy And Norms of Appropriate Use for Drones As drones proliferate, other nations will use them according to their own national interests. Inevitably, this will include extraterritorial drone strikes. There is a risk that other actors’ uses of drones could undermine legitimacy and political support for U.S. counterterrorism strikes.
In 2013, motivated by some of these problems, the United States initiated a broad review of its approach to drone exports that culminated in the February 2015 U.S. Export Policy for Military Unmanned Aerial Systems.46 The policy itself was not publicly releasable, but the State Department did release a fact sheet outlining the basic tenets of the policy. While the export policy recognized the applicability of existing arms control agreements, such as the MTCR, it also linked drone transfers to conditions on their use. Under the new policy, states desiring U.S. drones would have to agree to abide by “principles for proper use” of U.S.-origin drones. These principles include complying with applicable international law, not using drones for unlawful domestic surveillance or use of force, and encouraging “technical and doctrinal training … to reduce the risk of unintended injury or damage.”
The concerns outlined above certainly have merit. Still, it is important not to overstate the risk of drone deployments for regional or international stability. For example, none of the aforementioned incidents led to armed military engagement. On the contrary, emerging norms regarding the consequences of shooting down a drone, though clearly still in the early stages, suggest that states distinguish between the shooting down of manned and unmanned systems. Thus, even if there is an accident and a drone is brought down, it is less likely to trigger a crisis or military escalation than those in the pessimistic camp imply. For example, when Pakistan shot down an Indian surveillance drone in the Kashmir region in the summer of 2015 that it said strayed beyond the line of control, India did not escalate the long-simmering conflict to war.106 Similarly, compare the muted international discussion when Turkey shot down a drone flying on its border with Syria in the fall of 2015 with the diplomatic crisis between Turkey and Russia that erupted when Turkey brought down a manned SU-24.107 Countries appear to know that opponents will value drones differently from manned aircraft, and behave accordingly. Thus, drones carrying out surveillance and reconnaissance missions need not be destabilizing. [End Page 29] This may not always be the case, however, because the rules of engagement in this context are not yet clearly defined.
Third, existing views on drone proliferation gloss over a key point: drones may have stabilizing effects on the international security environment in some cases. Our analysis suggests that by enhancing the ability of states to monitor disputed territories and borders, drones can potentially reduce uncertainty [End Page 37] about an adversary’s behavior, which could promote peace if the enemy’s intentions are benign. If the adversary is making preparations for an attack, drones could increase the likelihood of early detection. Particularly given the fledgling, albeit shaky, norm that shooting down drones does not constitute grounds for escalating a conflict, this is a significant aspect of drone proliferation that existing studies ignore. But, because they make countries more likely to use force in certain circumstances and are easier to deploy, there is always a risk that drones could encourage crisis escalation in a case where an actor views the shooting down of its drones as especially provocative, or where the deployment of a drone leads to a diplomatic incident that might not otherwise occur.
Yet, in general, current-generation drones are likely to have a minimal impact on interstate relations. Armed or advanced unarmed drones are unlikely to provoke international crises or incite regional instability. In addition, current-generation drones offer little utility for coercion against other governments. Contrary to the conventional wisdom, moreover, drones might enhance security in disputed border regions by providing states with a greater ability to monitor contested regions persistently at lower cost. Monitoring can help to reassure states that potential adversaries are not attempting to change the status quo through force. The limited significance of current-generation drones in interstate contexts beyond monitoring stems from a key technological limitation: drones currently in operation are vulnerable to air defense systems, so they are much less likely to be effective when operating in hostile airspace.9
Drone proliferation pessimists often lament that weakening drone export controls will make it easier for states to launch military operations and destabilize security by triggering arms racing between states eager to one-up their rival’s drone capabilities. These concerns are likely overstated for two reasons.
If an adversary state is able and willing to match US nuclear capabilities and it designs its forces to match or beat Washington, then an arms race may very well occur. But it does not follow that the arms race is a cost of a robust US nuclear posture. Rather, it may be a benefit. Indeed, competing in and winning arms races is sometimes a necessary, if undesirable, part of international politics.
The RAND analysts raised no objections to this path, arguing that the horses were, in effect, already out of the barn, and that continuing to tightly control U.S. exports might push some allied countries to buy drones from others – which might in turn undermine future joint military operations that heavily use drones.
Faced with the shootdown of a military aircraft, how would U.S. decision makers respond? What if that aircraft were a drone? Much recent work argues that drones make the use of force more likely. The dominant argument is that removing pilots from harm’s way lowers the risk to friendly forces, making it easier for states to deploy drones and escalate crises. But how might drones affect what comes next? How might they shape escalation and the use of force after initially being deployed? A key determinant of whether a conflict will escalate is how actors respond to attacks on their military assets. Drones — military assets that can be attacked without hurting enemy personnel — change the calculus of retaliation.
As recent War on the Rocks articles have highlighted, wargames are used to refine doctrine and strategy and prepare for contingencies. By placing national security practitioners in realistic settings without the risks and costs associated with real-world operations, wargames allow policymakers to study decision-making and explore the effects of new technologies or shifts in the geopolitical environment. A growing body of research has focused on ways to improve the quality of insights that can be drawn from wargames.
Virtually every country on Earth will be able to build or acquire drones capable of firing missiles within the next ten years. Armed aerial drones will be used for targeted killings, terrorism and the government suppression of civil unrest. What’s worse, say experts, it’s too late for the United States to do anything about it. After the past decade’s explosive growth, it may seem that the U.S. is the only country with missile-carrying drones. In fact, the U.S. is losing interest in further developing armed drone technology. The military plans to spend $2.4 billion on unmanned aerial vehicles, or UAVs, in 2015. That’s down considerably from the $5.7 billion that the military requested in the 2013 budget. Other countries, conversely, have shown growing interest in making unmanned robot technology as deadly as possible. Only a handful of countries have armed flying drones today, including the U.S., United Kingdom, Israel, China and (possibly) Iran, Pakistan and Russia. Other countries want them, including South Africa and India. So far, 23 countries have developed or are developing armed drones, according to a recent report from the RAND organization. It’s only a matter of time before the lethal technology spreads, several experts say. “Once countries like China start exporting these, they’re going to be everywhere really quickly. Within the next 10 years, every country will have these,” Noel Sharkey, a robotics and artificial intelligence professor from the University of Sheffield, told Defense One. “There’s nothing illegal about these unless you use them to attack other countries. Anything you can [legally] do with a fighter jet, you can do with a drone.” Sam Brannen, who analyzes drones as a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies’ International Security Program, agreed with the timeline with some caveats. Within five years, he said, every country could have access to the equivalent of an armed UAV, like General Atomics’ Predator, which fires Hellfire missiles. He suggested five to 10 years as a more appropriate date for the global spread of heavier, longer range “hunter-killer” aircraft, like the MQ-9 Reaper. “It’s fair to say that the U.S. is leading now in the state of the art on the high end [UAVs]” such as the RQ-170. “Any country that has weaponized any aircraft will be able to weaponize a UAV,” said Mary Cummings, Duke University professor and former Navy fighter pilot, in a note of cautious agreement. “While I agree that within 10 years weaponized drones could be part of the inventory of most countries, I think it is premature to say that they will…. Such endeavors are expensive [and] require larger UAVs with the payload and range capable of carrying the additional weight, which means they require substantial sophistication in terms of the ground control station.” Not every country needs to develop an armed UAV program to acquire weaponized drones within a decade. China recently announced that it would be exporting to Saudi Arabia its Wing Loong, a Predator knock-off, a development that heralds the further roboticization of conflict in the Middle East, according to Peter Singer, Brookings fellow and author of Wired For War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the 21 st Century. “You could soon have U.S. and Chinese made drones striking in the same region,” he noted. Singer cautions that while the U.S. may be trying to wean itself off of armed UAV technology, many more countries are quickly becoming hooked. “What was once viewed as science fiction, and abnormal, is now normal… Nations in NATO that said they would never buy drones, and then said they would never use armed drones, are now saying, ‘Actually, we’re going to buy them.’ We’ve seen the U.K., France, and Italy go down that pathway. The other NATO states are right behind,” Singer told Defense One. Virtually any country, organization or individual could employ low-tech tactics to “weaponize” drones right now. “Not everything is going to be Predator class,” said Singer. “You’ve got a fuzzy line between cruise missiles and drones moving forward. There will be high-end expensive ones and low-end cheaper ones.” The recent use of drone surveillance and even the reported deployment of booby-trapped drones by Hezbollah, Singer said, are examples of do-it-yourself killer UAVs that will permeate the skies in the decade ahead – though more likely in the skies local to their host nation and not over American cities. “Not every nation is going to be able to carry out global strikes,” he said. In his paper, Brennan makes the same point more forcefully. “In the midst of this growing global interest, the United States has chosen to indefinitely put on hold sales of its most capable [unmanned aerial system] to many of its allies and partners, which has led these countries to seek other suppliers or to begin efforts to indigenously produce the systems,” he writes. “Continued indecision by the United States regarding export of this technology will not prevent the spread of these systems.” The Missile Technology Control Regime, or MTCR, is probably the most important piece of international policy that limits the exchange of drones and is a big reason why more countries don’t have weaponized drone technology. But China never signed onto it . The best way to insure that U.S. armed drones and those of our allies can operate together is to reconsider the way MTCR should apply to drones, Brannen writes. “U.S. export is unlikely to undermine the MTCR, which faces a larger set of challenges in preventing the proliferation of ballistic and cruise missiles, as well as addressing more problematic [unmanned]-cruise missile hybrids such as so-called loitering munitions (e.g., the Israeli-made Harop),” he writes.
The United States cannot stop drones from proliferating abroad, nor can it stop nefarious actors from using drones in harmful ways. The United States does have tools at its disposal, however, to help protect American national security interests in a world of proliferated drones. The Trump administration should adapt U.S. policy to help achieve U.S. objectives: preserving legal and political freedom of action for U.S. drone use; maintaining the U.S. military’s technological advantage over potential competitors; improving the military capabilities of key partners and allies; preventing or slowing the spread of potentially harmful drone technology; and shaping the behavior of how others use drones. Adapt Export and Counter-proliferation Policy to Keep Pace with Changing Technology Export policy: The Obama administration’s approach of strictly limiting drone exports, including to close partners such as Jordan, has been counterproductive and harms American interests. The diverse global marketplace means that drones are proliferating regardless of what the United States does. When U.S. partners buy Chinese instead of American drones, however, the United States loses an opportunity to deepen its defense relationships and interoperability becomes more difficult. Blocking U.S. companies from competing in the global marketplace also stymies American competitiveness and innovation, making it harder for the United States to maintain its technological edge in this rapidly changing arena. Even worse, the current process perversely promotes sales from other nations, since partners who would prefer U.S. drones are forced to turn elsewhere. While in its final years the Obama administration moved to increase exports, the current case-by-case process for review within the U.S. bureaucracy is slow and marred by vague guidance and competing priorities. Recommendation: The Trump administration should loosen restrictions on drone exports, treating them more like traditional aircraft. The administration should consider targeted exports of uninhabited aircraft, including armed uninhabited aircraft, to close partners and allies provided that they agree to the principles for proper use. Export policy should be supported by a clear set of criteria for assessment so that the process is swift and focused. MTCR: As the gap between MTCR guidelines and evolving drone technology widens, it may make sense to consider how to adapt and clarify MTCR guidelines. One way to do this would be for the United States to unilaterally interpret the MTCR’s guidance on “unmanned aerial vehicles (including cruise missiles, target drones and reconnaissance drones)” as applying to non-recoverable vehicles that function like missiles, rather than recoverable platforms that function like aircraft. Another alternative would be for the United States simply to be more willing to overcome the MTCR’s “strong presumption of denial” for drone exports to key partners. There are legitimate concerns over the risks of loosening MTCR restrictions and setting a negative precedent for international interpretation of MTCR guidelines and for other non-proliferation regimes. The reality, however, is that the current MTCR guidelines are ill-suited to adapt to the future of drone technology. Recommendation: The Trump administration should adapt its interpretation of MTCR guidelines to account for changing technology, while working with other MTCR member states to refine and change the MTCR guidelines over time. Prepare for Reality of Use as Drones Proliferate As drones proliferate, they will open up opportunities for state and non-state actors to use military force in novel ways, such as in gray zone conflicts or air attacks by non-state groups. Anticipating which capabilities drones enable will be a continuous challenge as commercial and military drone technology advances and adds to the variety of possible uses. Wargames and tabletop exercises are valuable analytic tools to help elucidate these various uses. Wargaming will stimulate the kind of creative thinking that can help policymakers anticipate challenges and possible responses, and can help inform future U.S. strategy and policy. Recommendation: The White House and DoD should run a series of DoD and interagency wargames to explore the implications of drones on escalation dynamics, especially in contested or gray zone conflicts. These wargames should include how drones might be used in crisis situations; possible reactions by others, such as shooting down drones; and how these actions might affect escalation and perceptions of commitment. These wargames can help policymakers anticipate future challenges and prepare U.S. responses to adversaries’ use of drones or actions against U.S. drones. Recommendation: DoD should explore the potential implications of nuclear-capable uninhabited vehicles, by PAPERS FOR THE PRESIDENT | JUNE 2017 Drone Proliferation: Policy Choices for the Trump Administration 18 the United States or other nations, on nuclear stability, crisis escalation, and positive control over nuclear weapons. DoD should explore opportunities to mitigate any potential strategic risks associated with nuclear-capable uninhabited vehicles, even if they are developed by other nations. Shape Perceptions of Legitimacy And Norms of Appropriate Use for Drones As drones proliferate, other nations will use them according to their own national interests. Inevitably, this will include extraterritorial drone strikes. There is a risk that other actors’ uses of drones could undermine legitimacy and political support for U.S. counterterrorism strikes. The United States should take steps now to more clearly communicate what it sees as legitimate and lawful uses of drones for counterterrorism in order to distinguish itself from illegitimate or unlawful uses. The United States has a steep hill to climb in shaping international perceptions about the use of drones. The core challenge is not that drone technology yields radically new capabilities but is instead that drones’ uninhabited nature yields new perceptions of military action by actors on the global stage. The secrecy surrounding U.S. drone strikes has contributed to a perception that they must be illegitimate or unlawful and therefore that drones are not beholden to international law. Approving targeted, conditional exports to responsible partners who agree to the principles for proper use is one way to encourage an international norm of responsible use of drones. Additionally, adding more signatories to the October 2016 Joint Declaration for the Export and Subsequent Use of Armed or Strike-Enabled UAVs could help reinforce this norm of responsible use. Finally, greater transparency in U.S. drone use could help the United States dispel myths and more clearly articulate the rationale for its actions. Recommendation: The Trump administration should continue to work with other nations to expand the number of state signatories to the Joint Declaration for the Export and Subsequent Use of Armed or StrikeEnabled UAVs and encourage responsible use of drones consistent with international law. Recommendation: The Trump administration should increase transparency about its use of drones outside areas of active hostilities, to the extent possible taking into account operational security concerns. The rapid proliferation of drones and continued advancement of drone technology pose challenges for the United States. In some areas, such as the Joint Declaration for the Export and Subsequent Use of Armed or Strike-Enabled UAVs, the United States has been proactive in shaping international perceptions about responsible use. In other areas, such as drone exports, U.S. policy has yet to sufficiently adapt to a world of proliferated drones. The U.S. monopoly on drones has ended. The United States must now take proactive measures to come to grips with an increasingly drone-saturated world.
The last great revolution on the world’s battlefields began with the advent of the drone era. Particularly in the Middle East, the drone became the symbol of the U.S. empire operating in a legal vacuum. In the first decade and a half of the “War on Terror,” the U.S. still had a virtual monopoly on the risk-free execution from thousands of meters above — but once the genie is out of the bottle, every attempt to squeeze it back in is notoriously doomed to failure. And so, quickly other countries in the region aspired after the financially — and politically — cheap execution by drone. The number of armies with their own drone fleet is growing rapidly. A multi-billion-dollar market with astronomical growth rates opened up — demand that’s essentially served only by one actor: China. The U.S. has squandered its lead The appearance of the Rainbow CH-4 — the driving force of Chinese combat drones — is almost identical to the notorious Reaper drone of the U.S. arms manufacturer General Atomics. While the CH-4 lags behind the Reaper in most performance parameters, it can keep up with or even outperform its competitor in some of them. Also, the CH-4’s weaponry, the AKD-10 warhead, is almost identical to the Reaper’s Hellfire missiles. The striking similarity follows a strategy of Chinese engineering well-known from cell phones or cars: the look of a world-famous Western branded product is copied with an inferior but sufficiently good quality compared to that of the original — but at significantly less cost. Chinese drones are 50 to 75 percent cheaper than the originals from the U.S. A late 2015 article published in the Asia Times suggests that this copying of U.S. technology is likely rooted in Beijing’s data theft. According to records by world-famous NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden, by 2010 alone “Chinese hackers had conducted more than 30,000 cyber attacks” on Pentagon computer networks and other U.S. military agencies in order to “exfiltrate [data on] sensitive military technology.” Although there is no final proof that data on drones were skimmed off too, Asia Times quotes then NSA director Gen. Keith Alexander, who suggests that it is highly likely that the Reaper blueprints were part of the Chinese data hack, while military experts and analysts largely share this view. With the latest model — the CH-7, which is still in the development phase — China could possibly pull ahead the U.S. for the first time, military journal Defense One explains. The CH-7 “will be the sole option for buyers wanting to field stealth combat drones,” it predicts. “The United States had a decade-plus head start on [drone] technology,” says military expert Paul Scharre, “and has unfortunately squandered that lead.” For a long time, it was only the United States, the United Kingdom, and Israel that had combat drones and used them to execute alleged terrorists — something that has changed dramatically in recent years. Meanwhile, the number of countries with combat drones has swelled to at least 29, as research organization New America identifies. And 10 countries have demonstrably used them to kill suspected enemies; in addition to the three mentioned, there is Iran, Azerbaijan, the UAE, as well as Nigeria, Iraq, Pakistan, and Turkey (the last four countries drone-killed people on their own soil). Historically, Israel is the largest drone exporter, with a market share of over 60 percent in the last three decades. More recently, from 2008-2017, China exported a total of 88 drones to at least 12 countries, ranking third among the world’s drone exporters behind the United States (351) and Israel (186). However, while the vast majority of U.S. and Israeli exports are made up of unarmed reconnaissance drones, China’s sales focus on armed drones. During the mentioned period, China exported 68 combat drones, putting it ahead of the U.S. (62) and Israel (56). Foreign Policy thus recently titled rightly: “China Has Already Won the Drone Wars.” All of the armed forces of the Chinese military have large fleets of various drones, but Beijing has used them so far only for disaster relief, surveillance of domestic critics, and military reconnaissance — not to kill. (In 2013, Beijing considered executing by drone a Myanmar drug baron wanted in the murders of 13 Chinese sailors, but eventually caught and tried him.) Rather, Beijing appears to be establishing a norm permanently prohibiting lethal drone strikes in East and South Asia. However, this no-shoot dogma does not prevent the Chinese arms industry from exporting their drones to states that are patently using them for killing elsewhere. While the Pentagon continues to this day to deliver armed Reaper drones only to the UK, France, and Italy, purchasers of Chinese combat drones, according to Chinese manufacturers, include Algeria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iraq, Jordan, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Turkmenistan, the UAE, and Zambia. So far, the three largest buyers of Chinese drones are Pakistan (with a share of 25 percent) as well as Egypt and Myanmar (with 23 and 13 percent, respectively). Several of Beijing’s buyers are close strategic U.S. allies who have requested the sale of armed drones from Washington to no avail and have thus fallen back on Chinese products. The U.S. is by far the largest arms exporter and usually sells military equipment to almost every country in the world. According to the SIPRI research institute, the U.S. sold $98 billion worth of weapons to as many as 112 countries in 2007-2017. Hence, on the face of it, it seems rather counterintuitive that it would hand over the lucrative battle drone market to China. A recent report by the DIA, the Pentagon’s internal intelligence service, deals with this contradiction. “China is a niche provider of armed [drones]” in the Middle East, the report acknowledges, and correctly concludes that “China faces little competition” as it is not a member of international export control regimes. In fact, unlike the U.S. and the European arms-exporting countries, China is not a contracting party to the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTRC), which strictly regulates the proliferation of combat drones and makes U.S. drone exports to the Middle East more difficult. In addition to attempts by the Trump administration to amend the MTRC, Trump’s State Department published a new export policy in April 2018: “We will remove barriers to the global [drone] market and avoid ceding export opportunities to competitors where such self-imposed restrictions are unwarranted.” Since the wording does not specify when restrictions are “unwarranted,” the new policy can be understood as blank approval for future drone exports. De facto, it was also made possible to buy combat drones directly from the manufacturer, without the government as a broker agent. “To date, however, that hasn’t led to any reported sales to the Middle East,” Forbes reported late last year. So, in contrast to relatively strict regulations on U.S. drone exports, China’s “no questions asked” policy allowed it to quickly gain a foothold in the lucrative Middle East drone market and aggressively expand the course of the proliferation of cheap drones. State-of-the-art technology perceived as revolutionary always comes with a certain adulation for its possessor. Thus, a recent report by London-based military think tank RUSI concludes that “national prestige and status is the main reason that most states” in the Middle East increasingly acquire drones, as Middle East Eye reports. However, in addition to their value as status symbols, in recent years they are more and more being used strategically on the battlefields of the region, which the RUSI report attributes largely to increased Chinese exports. And so Chinese drones also recorded their first deaths: Besides fatal deployment by the Nigerian army against Boko Haram, since the end of 2015, the Iraqi military performed more than 260 air strikes against Islamic State targets with Chinese drones. They gained particular infamy on April 22 last year, when the UAE executed the de facto president of Yemen, Saleh Ali al-Sammad, with a Chinese drone, escalating the nearly four-year war in the country. The murdered Al-Sammad was seen as a promoter of the UN-mediated peace process in Yemen, whereas his successor, Mahdi al-Mashat, is an implacable, uncompromising hardliner and provocateur. Of particular concern is China’s drone policy in Saudi Arabia. A $ 65 billion economic program clinched between the two countries in spring 2017 includes the construction of a Chinese drone factory in Saudi Arabia — the first of its kind in the region. Initially, the license production of 300 drones was agreed, which represents a massive figure given the 88 drones that China has exported in the last decade altogether. However, the license drones are not exclusively intended for the Saudi Royal Air Force — Riyadh can explicitly market them to other countries in the region. End-user certificates do not exist for deals with Beijing. In view of the fact that Saudi Arabia, along with supporting various jihadist groups in the region, is a close ally of Al Qaeda in Yemen, it is within the realm of possibility to envision some of these drones end up in terrorist’s hands. Fueled by Beijing’s export policy, the threat scenario of drone-armed jihadists has moved significantly closer. Research by the Jamestown Foundation shows that we have already entered the era of “unmanned terrorism.” Groups commonly labelled as “terrorists” from Syria, Iraq, and Afghanistan to Gaza, Lebanon, and Yemen are already using mini-drones to drop bombs, grenades, and incendiary devices onto enemy positions or civilian facilities. Further flooding the region with cheap combat drones from China will certainly heave these tactics to the next level in the future. Since 2001, thousands of people, most of them civilians, have been killed by drone in the so-called “War on Terror,” changing the nature of war in its entirety and exposing civilians in all these undeclared war zones to a permanent threat on their lives. Nobel Peace Prize laureate Barack Obama proved he could always escape punishment and international condemnation even after using drones to turn weddings and funerals into blood baths and mass graves. And so, the desires of local actors to acquire these practical killing tools were aroused, too. The Chinese leadership is exploiting these developments without compromise and flooding the Middle East with cheap drones. The consequences of this expansionary policy cannot be foreseen.
Despite these considerable and numerous advantages, armed UAVs are rarely transformative. Many of the capabilities of armed UAVs of all sizes can be found in other weapon systems, although the UAV may offer some advantages. Helicopters, cruise and ballistic missiles, and manned aircraft can perform many, if not most, armed UAV functions. Even the poster child for armed UAVs—fighting al Qaeda–linked terrorists and Taliban insurgents—demonstrates this point. The United States possesses several alternatives to UAVs—e.g., cruise missiles, airstrikes by fixed-wing aircraft, special operations forces raids—and has employed them all at various times.
Armed UAV systems are not transformative weapons, though they offer the United States some significant advantages, particularly against enemies that lack air defenses. It is plausible, though not necessarily likely, that a substate group might employ armed drones to create a significant psychological effect. Innovations, such as the discovery of ways to make stealth technology cheap and easily available, could alter these conclusions, but none of these are likely.
The proliferation of military drones worldwide is accelerating at an alarming rate, due to the willingness of certain states, like China, to export them widely. Eighteen countries may now have armed drones, with more than a dozen seeking to acquire them. (Armed drones, in this context, being those made for military purposes.) Few of these states can use drones with the global reach of the United States, which is able to fly an RQ-4A Global Hawk over Ukraine or Afghanistan, controlled from more than 7,000 miles away. But other countries’ drones are very much applicable to their own more limited security needs, such as potentially combating insurgencies in disputed regions of India or conducting border surveillance in Jordan. This spread of military drones—also known as Uninhabited Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA)—is an important international security issue for several reasons. Chief among them is that many countries buy armed drones from exporters who care little about how the buyers use them. When the United States sells a weapon system to a partner or ally, it requires the buyer to abide not only by international law, but also by additional US restrictions. The United States has leverage because it can cut off the supply of replacement parts and ammunition. When China sells weapons, it places no such restrictions. As a result, the buyer can use the weapon system without any concern for international laws and regulations. This makes it more likely that countries will use armed drones in ways that contribute to instability. Drone proliferation cannot be stopped at this point. It can, however, be managed in a way that is less destabilizing and encourages more compliance with international law. Increasing US drone exports could be part of the solution, but would currently be difficult to accomplish given Washington’s obligations under the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). The answer is to rethink the MTCR—a regime designed to control the spread of missiles, which ostensibly governs drone exports too but has so far failed to prevent their spread. An agreement adrift. The G7 nations founded the MTCR in 1987 to prevent the proliferation of delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction, especially those with a range of more than 300 kilometers (km) and a payload capability of over 500 kilograms (kg). Under the regime, missiles with such capabilities are designated Category I systems. Exports of Category I systems by member states are subject to a “strong presumption of denial,” meaning countries should only license them for export on rare occasions. The MTCR—“an informal political understanding among states” by its own definition—now has 35 members, including the United States and Russia but not China. Membership and compliance are voluntary. While drones are different from missiles in important respects, the MTCR lumped them in with cruise missiles in the early 1990s because they are remotely piloted, travel over long distances, and could theoretically carry weapons of mass destruction. Over time, technological developments mean UAVs have become more versatile in their military applications, a strong motivating factor behind the desire to stop their proliferation. What this has unfortunately meant is that transparent, cooperating members of the MTCR are prevented from selling UAVs abroad, while non-members like China and Israel can export UAVs, regardless of payload and range, to many customers. In China’s case, these customers include Egypt, Jordan, and other states that are allies or partners of the United States. These UAV-selling non-members are often not transparent about their platforms’ capabilities, or export UAVs that they claim have capabilities just under the Category I limits. Some of the flaws giving rise to this situation are embedded in the MTCR itself. For instance, when applied to drones, the range and payload guidelines built into the MTCR seem arbitrary. Category I items include “rocket systems … and unmanned air vehicle systems” above the 300 km and 500 kg limits. But these limits do not denote any meaningful divide in UAV capabilities. In addition, inhabited aircraft (those piloted by a person on board) are exempt from MTCR restrictions. This is as it should be, since missiles and airplanes have different characteristics. But it means the United States can, for example, export a fighter jet like the Boeing F-15—which has a range of more than 2,000 km and a maximum payload of almost 13,400 kg—while being barred from exporting an MQ-9 Reaper drone, which is slower, easier to shoot down, and carries a payload only a tenth the size. One might argue that UAVs should count as missiles because a bad actor could load a weapon of mass destruction on one and use it as a sort of cruise missile. But a military could use remote piloting to accomplish the same task with existing fighter aircraft that are unregulated by the MTCR. In fact, inhabited aircraft are much more like drones than missiles, in that they are reusable and directly piloted rather than preprogramed. Due to that “strong presumption of denial” clause, and despite domestic policy changes, it is difficult for the United States to sell advanced armed drones to many allies and partners, such as Jordan. Options for reform. The status quo has not just failed to control the spread of armed drones, but also undermined the credibility of the MTCR as a whole. Reform is necessary. From an American perspective, if the United States could export UAVs under rules more like those governing exports of fighter aircraft, it could ensure that countries use their drones more responsibly than if they acquire drones from other sources. US drone exports could also build the capacity of US allies and partners, who would generally prefer to buy American anyway. The Arms Export Control Act requires governments receiving weapons from the United States to use any armaments only for legitimate self-defense and in accordance with international law. Moreover, diminishing the market share of non-members of the MTCR would reduce their ability to use drone revenues for future technology development. Additionally, allied forces using American UAVs, instead of Chinese or Israeli platforms, would have greater interoperability with the US military. Interoperability enables coalition building, can reduce alliance-wide military expenditures, and increases the overall efficacy of military capabilities. To help achieve these goals, members need to rethink the MTCR, though there are no clear fixes for how to move forward. The regime operates by consensus, making substantive change difficult to achieve. Russia, for example, is well aware of the way the MTCR constrains American UAV exports, and might seek to block any changes, or threaten to violate the regime by exporting more Category I missiles in response. Such challenges notwithstanding, it would be worthwhile to continue discussing changes to regime rules. One option would be altering the MTCR to put drones in the same category as inhabited aircraft, which are not regulated by the regime. This would be a common-sense solution, as UAVs are more like aircraft than they are like cruise or ballistic missiles. A second option might involve a broader shift away from exclusive reliance on the 300 km and 500 kg restrictions. For example, adding a speed constraint to the definition of a Category I system could distinguish missiles from UAVs, since missiles travel so much faster. This kind of shift might be more palatable to other members than the first option. But UAVs will evolve over time, and could become significantly faster. Creating restrictions based on a snapshot of the technological present runs the risk that regulations will become obsolete sooner rather than later. If changes to the MTCR itself are not possible, states have other options. For example, the United States could remain a member of the MTCR, but simply ignore the regime’s guidelines on UAVs and choose to treat drones more like inhabited aircraft. In 2016, the United States and 53 other countries already signed a Joint Declaration on the responsible export and use of UAVs; Washington could observe those guidelines instead. If it also reaffirmed its commitment to preventing long-range missile proliferation, this move could, in theory, allow the MTCR to retain credibility for preventing the spread of ballistic and cruise missiles. Yet such a unilateral move by the United States might encourage MTCR members like Russia and others to increase missile exports. The regime has successfully slowed proliferation of long-range ballistic missiles, and to a lesser degree cruise missiles. This effect would likely diminish. Finally, current MTCR members and other interested states could create a new arms control agreement focused specifically on drone proliferation, while exempting drones from the MTCR. But it would be hard to conclude a new agreement in the current international political climate. Moreover, it is not clear what the basis of such an agreement would be. There appears to be little appetite for a more formal international agreement beyond the Obama-era Joint Declaration. There is no easy answer, but MTCR members—as well as other governments—have to consider the options. Turning back the clock to a time when few countries had military drones is not going to be possible. However, governments can manage their spread in a way that is less destabilizing, with fewer violations of international law. A more common-sense approach, treating drones more like aircraft than missiles, is likely a key part of the answer.
The proliferation of military drones worldwide is accelerating at an alarming rate, due to the willingness of certain states, like China, to export them widely. Eighteen countries may now have armed drones, with more than a dozen seeking to acquire them. (Armed drones, in this context, being those made for military purposes.) Few of these states can use drones with the global reach of the United States, which is able to fly an RQ-4A Global Hawk over Ukraine or Afghanistan, controlled from more than 7,000 miles away. But other countries’ drones are very much applicable to their own more limited security needs, such as potentially combating insurgencies in disputed regions of India or conducting border surveillance in Jordan. This spread of military drones—also known as Uninhabited Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA)—is an important international security issue for several reasons. Chief among them is that many countries buy armed drones from exporters who care little about how the buyers use them. When the United States sells a weapon system to a partner or ally, it requires the buyer to abide not only by international law, but also by additional US restrictions. The United States has leverage because it can cut off the supply of replacement parts and ammunition. When China sells weapons, it places no such restrictions. As a result, the buyer can use the weapon system without any concern for international laws and regulations. This makes it more likely that countries will use armed drones in ways that contribute to instability. Drone proliferation cannot be stopped at this point. It can, however, be managed in a way that is less destabilizing and encourages more compliance with international law. Increasing US drone exports could be part of the solution, but would currently be difficult to accomplish given Washington’s obligations under the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). The answer is to rethink the MTCR—a regime designed to control the spread of missiles, which ostensibly governs drone exports too but has so far failed to prevent their spread. An agreement adrift. The G7 nations founded the MTCR in 1987 to prevent the proliferation of delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction, especially those with a range of more than 300 kilometers (km) and a payload capability of over 500 kilograms (kg). Under the regime, missiles with such capabilities are designated Category I systems. Exports of Category I systems by member states are subject to a “strong presumption of denial,” meaning countries should only license them for export on rare occasions. The MTCR—“an informal political understanding among states” by its own definition—now has 35 members, including the United States and Russia but not China. Membership and compliance are voluntary. While drones are different from missiles in important respects, the MTCR lumped them in with cruise missiles in the early 1990s because they are remotely piloted, travel over long distances, and could theoretically carry weapons of mass destruction. Over time, technological developments mean UAVs have become more versatile in their military applications, a strong motivating factor behind the desire to stop their proliferation. What this has unfortunately meant is that transparent, cooperating members of the MTCR are prevented from selling UAVs abroad, while non-members like China and Israel can export UAVs, regardless of payload and range, to many customers. In China’s case, these customers include Egypt, Jordan, and other states that are allies or partners of the United States. These UAV-selling non-members are often not transparent about their platforms’ capabilities, or export UAVs that they claim have capabilities just under the Category I limits. Some of the flaws giving rise to this situation are embedded in the MTCR itself. For instance, when applied to drones, the range and payload guidelines built into the MTCR seem arbitrary. Category I items include “rocket systems … and unmanned air vehicle systems” above the 300 km and 500 kg limits. But these limits do not denote any meaningful divide in UAV capabilities. In addition, inhabited aircraft (those piloted by a person on board) are exempt from MTCR restrictions. This is as it should be, since missiles and airplanes have different characteristics. But it means the United States can, for example, export a fighter jet like the Boeing F-15—which has a range of more than 2,000 km and a maximum payload of almost 13,400 kg—while being barred from exporting an MQ-9 Reaper drone, which is slower, easier to shoot down, and carries a payload only a tenth the size. One might argue that UAVs should count as missiles because a bad actor could load a weapon of mass destruction on one and use it as a sort of cruise missile. But a military could use remote piloting to accomplish the same task with existing fighter aircraft that are unregulated by the MTCR. In fact, inhabited aircraft are much more like drones than missiles, in that they are reusable and directly piloted rather than preprogramed. Due to that “strong presumption of denial” clause, and despite domestic policy changes, it is difficult for the United States to sell advanced armed drones to many allies and partners, such as Jordan. The status quo has not just failed to control the spread of armed drones, but also undermined the credibility of the MTCR as a whole. Reform is necessary. From an American perspective, if the United States could export UAVs under rules more like those governing exports of fighter aircraft, it could ensure that countries use their drones more responsibly than if they acquire drones from other sources. US drone exports could also build the capacity of US allies and partners, who would generally prefer to buy American anyway. The Arms Export Control Act requires governments receiving weapons from the United States to use any armaments only for legitimate self-defense and in accordance with international law. Moreover, diminishing the market share of non-members of the MTCR would reduce their ability to use drone revenues for future technology development. Additionally, allied forces using American UAVs, instead of Chinese or Israeli platforms, would have greater interoperability with the US military. Interoperability enables coalition building, can reduce alliance-wide military expenditures, and increases the overall efficacy of military capabilities. To help achieve these goals, members need to rethink the MTCR, though there are no clear fixes for how to move forward. The regime operates by consensus, making substantive change difficult to achieve. Russia, for example, is well aware of the way the MTCR constrains American UAV exports, and might seek to block any changes, or threaten to violate the regime by exporting more Category I missiles in response. Such challenges notwithstanding, it would be worthwhile to continue discussing changes to regime rules. One option would be altering the MTCR to put drones in the same category as inhabited aircraft, which are not regulated by the regime. This would be a common-sense solution, as UAVs are more like aircraft than they are like cruise or ballistic missiles. A second option might involve a broader shift away from exclusive reliance on the 300 km and 500 kg restrictions. For example, adding a speed constraint to the definition of a Category I system could distinguish missiles from UAVs, since missiles travel so much faster. This kind of shift might be more palatable to other members than the first option. But UAVs will evolve over time, and could become significantly faster. Creating restrictions based on a snapshot of the technological present runs the risk that regulations will become obsolete sooner rather than later. If changes to the MTCR itself are not possible, states have other options. For example, the United States could remain a member of the MTCR, but simply ignore the regime’s guidelines on UAVs and choose to treat drones more like inhabited aircraft. In 2016, the United States and 53 other countries already signed a Joint Declaration on the responsible export and use of UAVs; Washington could observe those guidelines instead. If it also reaffirmed its commitment to preventing long-range missile proliferation, this move could, in theory, allow the MTCR to retain credibility for preventing the spread of ballistic and cruise missiles. Yet such a unilateral move by the United States might encourage MTCR members like Russia and others to increase missile exports. The regime has successfully slowed proliferation of long-range ballistic missiles, and to a lesser degree cruise missiles. This effect would likely diminish. Finally, current MTCR members and other interested states could create a new arms control agreement focused specifically on drone proliferation, while exempting drones from the MTCR. But it would be hard to conclude a new agreement in the current international political climate. Moreover, it is not clear what the basis of such an agreement would be. There appears to be little appetite for a more formal international agreement beyond the Obama-era Joint Declaration. There is no easy answer, but MTCR members—as well as other governments—have to consider the options. Turning back the clock to a time when few countries had military drones is not going to be possible. However, governments can manage their spread in a way that is less destabilizing, with fewer violations of international law. A more common-sense approach, treating drones more like aircraft than missiles, is likely a key part of the answer.
Yet irrespective of what numbers one accepts as the best estimate of harms of drone warfare, or the legal proportionality of the drone strikes, the moral question is simply, What’s the alternative? One way to answer this is to start from the proposition that if you believe the use of force in these circumstances is lawful and ethical, then all things being equal as an ethical matter, the method of force used should be the one that spares the most civilians while achieving its lawful aims. If that is the comparison of moral alternatives, there is simply no serious way to dispute that drone warfare is the best method available. It is more discriminating and more precise than other available means of air warfare, including manned aircraft—as France and Britain, lacking their own drones and forced to rely on far less precise manned jet strikes, found over Libya and Mali—and Tomahawk cruise missiles. A second observation is to look across the history of precision weapons in the past several decades. I started my career as a human-rights campaigner, kicking off the campaign to ban landmines for leading organizations. Around 1990, I had many conversations with military planners, asking them to develop more accurate and discriminating weapons—ones with smaller kinetic force and greater ability to put the force where sought. Although every civilian death is a tragedy, and drone warfare is very far from being the perfect tool   the Obama administration sometimes suggests, for someone who has watched weapons development over a quarter century, the drone represents a steady advance in precision that has cut zeroes off collateral-damage figures. Those who see only the snapshot of civilian harm today are angered by civilian deaths. But barring an outbreak of world peace, it is foolish and immoral not to encourage the development and use of more sparing and exact weapons. One has only to look at the campaigns of the Pakistani army to see the alternatives in action. The Pakistani military for many years has been in a running war with its own Taliban and has regularly attacked villages in the tribal areas with heavy and imprecise airstrikes. A few years ago, it thought it had reached an accommodation with an advancing Taliban, but when the enemy decided it wanted not just the Swat Valley but Islamabad, the Pakistani government decided it had no choice but to drive it back. And it did, with a punishing campaign of airstrikes and rolling artillery barrages that leveled whole villages, left hundreds of thousands without homes, and killed hundreds. But critics do not typically evaluate drones against the standards of the artillery barrage of manned airstrikes, because their assumption, explicit or implicit, is that there is no call to use force at all. And of course, if the assumption is that you don’t need or should not use force, then any civilian death by drones is excessive. That cannot be blamed on drone warfare, its ethics or effectiveness, but on a much bigger question of whether one ought to use force in counterterrorism at all.
Signature strikes may not be new, but our new techniques are helping reduce civilian harm, despite the “evidence” Still, the US military and intelligence community is becoming impressively proficient at identifying and locating individual members of the enemy. Despite the much publicized (but mostly classified) report recently published by the Center for Naval Analysis’ Larry Lewis, most reliable evidence says that drones, even when used for signature strikes, are much more discriminant and precise, killing or injuring fewer civilians per strike, and far fewer per militant killed. Much of the evidence to the contrary is in fact gained from anonymous sources linked to the Pakistani military or to the militants themselves. Given the sourcing–the enemy and their patrons–it is a little surprising that the claimed number of civilian deaths is in fact so low, even including signature strikes. Maybe these sources are willing to double the number of civilian casualties, but tripling it seems a bridge too far (except for a stalwart few who transparently either fudge their numbers or need to retake middle school pre-algebra). As a case in point, even the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, who appears at first to be an honest broker of information on drone strikes, upon deeper investigation, are highly biased. They reported yesterday that the number of civilian deaths due to drone strikes in Pakistan has been underreported by 81. They describe this as a “high civilian death toll,” but for a campaign waged over the course of nine years, this is actually an extremely low death toll. I challenge anyone to find another military campaign that lasted nine years yet killed fewer than 45 civilians per year (according to their numbers). However, even these numbers are suspect, as can be seen from their source document, a leaked Pakistani summary of drone strike casualties. Setting aside the arithmetic problems (4+5=8? Apparently, in Pakistan. See line 78), several problems indicate unreliability. First, the number of civilians killed is not always as clear as the Bureau would have it. In the vast majority of “civilian” casualty cases, the number of civilians are not specified, and is indictated only by inclusion of the word “civilian” in the remarks column. It is not clear whether this means all dead and wounded were civilians or whether one or some of them were. However, in other cases, the number is given, or the remarks indicate that they were “all civilians.” Second, and more damning, only two references were made to militants out of the nearly 750 dead in 84 attacks. However, one entry refers to “miscreants,” and several others list foreigners as among the dead. This raises the suspicion that the number of militants killed is actually under-reported, and thus the possibility that some listed as civilians are in fact militants. Third, and worst of all for the reliability of this information, it is apparently obtained secondhand and from afar. Several of the entries indicate that the information is “reported” or “yet to be received.” Local elders and even local political administrations are often pro-Taliban or otherwise compromised (e.g. by bribery which constitutes the majority of their income). The hard truth is that coming to even a good, ball-parked number of civilian dead is extremely difficult. But what is clear is that the US drone campaign, even when using signature strikes, has a remarkably low rate of civilian casualties when compared to other available options, given their advanced optics, long loiter times, and precision munitions. Those who advocate against drones tend to focus on the technology, when what they are actually opposed to is the use of force in general. This is a laudable sentiment, but these same folks never seem to be willing to offer workable alternatives.
Many, though certainly not all, people might believe that it would be wrong to bring about the end of the human species, and the reasons given for this belief are various. I begin by considering four reasons that could be given against the moral permissibility of human extinction. I will argue that only those reasons that impact the people who exist at the time that the extinction or the knowledge of the upcoming extinction occurs, can explain its wrongness. I use this conclusion to then consider in which cases human extinction would be morally permissible or impermissible, arguing that there is only a small class of cases in which it would not be wrong to cause the extinction of the human race or allow it to happen. 2.1. It would prevent the existence of very many happy people One reason of human extinction might be considered to be wrong lies in the value of human life itself. The thought here might be that it is a good thing for people to exist and enjoy happy lives and extinction would deprive more people of enjoying this good. The ‘good’ in this case could be understood in at least two ways. According to the first, one might believe that you benefit a person by bringing them into existence, or at least, that it is good for that person that they come to exist. The second view might hold that if humans were to go extinct, the utility foregone by the billions (or more) of people who could have lived but will now never get that opportunity, renders allowing human extinction to take place an incidence of wrongdoing. An example of this view can be found in two quotes from an Effective Altruism blog post by Peter Singer, Nick Beckstead and Matt Wage: One very bad thing about human extinction would be that billions of people would likely die painful deaths. But in our view, this is by far not the worst thing about human extinction. The worst thing about human extinction is that there would be no future generations. Since there could be so many generations in our future, the value of all those generations together greatly exceeds the value of the current generation. (Beckstead, Singer, and Wage 2013) The authors are making two claims. The first is that there is value in human life and also something valuable about creating future people which gives us a reason to do so; furthermore, it would be a very bad thing if we did not do so. The second is that, not only would it be a bad thing for there to be no future people, but it would actually be the worst thing about extinction. Since happy human lives have value, and the number of potential people who could ever exist is far greater than the number of people who exist at any one time, even if the extinction were brought about through the painful deaths of currently existing people, the former’s loss would be greater than the latter’s. Both claims are assuming that there is an intrinsic value in the existence of potential human life. The second claim makes the further assumption that the forgone value of the potential lives that could be lived is greater than the disvalue that would be accrued by people existing at the time of the extinction through suffering from painful and/or premature deaths. The best-known author of the post, Peter Singer is a prominent utilitarian, so it is not surprising that he would lament the potential lack of future human lives per se. However, it is not just utilitarians who share this view, even if implicitly. Indeed, other philosophers also seem to imply that they share the intuition that there is just something wrong with causing or failing to prevent the extinction of the human species such that we prevent more ‘people’ from having the ‘opportunity to exist’. Stephen Gardiner (2009) and Martin O’Neill (personal correspondence), both sympathetic to contract theory, for example, also find it intuitive that we should want more generations to have the opportunity to exist, assuming that they have worth-living lives, and I find it plausible to think that many other people (philosophers and non-philosophers alike) probably share this intuition. When we talk about future lives being ‘prevented’, we are saying that a possible person or a set of possible people who could potentially have existed will now never actually come to exist. To say that it is wrong to prevent people from existing could either mean that a possible person could reasonably reject a principle that permitted us not to create them, or that the foregone value of their lives provides a reason for rejecting any principle that permits extinction. To make the first claim we would have to argue that a possible person could reasonably reject any principle that prevented their existence on the grounds that it prevented them in particular from existing. However, this is implausible for two reasons. First, we can only wrong someone who did, does or will actually exist because wronging involves failing to take a person’s interests into account. When considering the permissibility of a principle allowing us not to create Person X, we cannot take X’s interest in being created into account because X will not exist if we follow the principle. By considering the standpoint of a person in our deliberations we consider the burdens they will have to bear as a result of the principle. In this case, there is no one who will bear any burdens since if the principle is followed (that is, if we do not create X), X will not exist to bear any burdens. So, only people who do/will actually exist can bear the brunt of a principle, and therefore occupy a standpoint that is owed justification. Second, existence is not an interest at all and a possible person is not disadvantaged by not being caused to exist. Rather than being an interest, it is a necessary requirement in order to have interests. Rivka Weinberg describes it as ‘neutral’ because causing a person to exist is to create a subject who can have interests; existence is not an interest itself.3 In order to be disadvantaged, there must be some detrimental effect on your interests. However, without existence, a person does not have any interests so they cannot be disadvantaged by being kept out of existence. But, as Weinberg points out, ‘never having interests itself could not be contrary to people’s interests since without interest bearers, there can be no ‘they’ for it to be bad for’ (Weinberg 2008, 13). So, a principle that results in some possible people never becoming actual does not impose any costs on those ‘people’ because nobody is disadvantaged by not coming into existence.4 It therefore seems that it cannot be wrong to fail to bring particular people into existence. This would mean that no one acts wrongly when they fail to create another person. Writ large, it would also not be wrong if everybody decided to exercise their prerogative not to create new people and potentially, by consequence, allow human extinction. One might respond here by saying that although it may be permissible for one person to fail to create a new person, it is not permissible if everyone chooses to do so because human lives have value and allowing human extinction would be to forgo a huge amount of value in the world. This takes us to the second way of understanding the potential wrongness of preventing people from existing — the foregone value of a life provides a reason for rejecting any principle that prevents it. One possible reply to this claim turns on the fact that many philosophers acknowledge that the only, or at least the best, way to think about the value of (individual or groups of) possible people’s lives is in impersonal terms (Parfit 1984; Reiman 2007; McMahan 2009). Jeff McMahan, for example, writes ‘at the time of one’s choice there is no one who exists or will exist independently of that choice for whose sake one could be acting in causing him or her to exist … it seems therefore that any reason to cause or not to cause an individual to exist … is best considered an impersonal rather than individual-affecting reason’ (McMahan 2009, 52). Another reply along similar lines would be to appeal to the value that is lost or at least foregone when we fail to bring into existence a next (or several next) generations of people with worth-living lives. Since ex hypothesi worth-living lives have positive value, it is better to create more such lives and worse to create fewer. Human extinction by definition is the creation of no future lives and would ‘deprive’ billions of ‘people’ of the opportunity to live worth-living lives. This might reduce the amount of value in the world at the time of the extinction (by killing already existing people), but it would also prevent a much vaster amount of value in the future (by failing to create more people). Both replies depend on the impersonal value of human life. However, recall that in contractualism impersonal values are not on their own grounds for reasonably rejecting principles. Scanlon himself says that although we have a strong reason not to destroy existing human lives, this reason ‘does not flow from the thought that it is a good thing for there to be more human life rather than less’ (104). In contractualism, something cannot be wrong unless there is an impact on a person. Thus, neither the impersonal value of creating a particular person nor the impersonal value of human life writ large could on its own provide a reason for rejecting a principle permitting human extinction. It seems therefore that the fact that extinction would deprive future people of the opportunity to live worth-living lives (either by failing to create either particular future people or future people in general) cannot provide us with a reason to consider human extinction to be wrong. Although the lost value of these ‘lives’ itself cannot be the reason explaining the wrongness of extinction, it is possible the knowledge of this loss might create a personal reason for some existing people. I will consider this possibility later on in section (d). But first I move to the second reason human extinction might be wrong per se. 2.2. It would mean the loss of the only known form of intelligent life and all civilization and intellectual progress would be lost A second reason we might think it would be wrong to cause human extinction is the loss that would occur of the only (known) form of rational life and the knowledge and civilization that that form of life has created. One thought here could be that just as some might consider it wrong to destroy an individual human heritage monument like the Sphinx, it would also be wrong if the advances made by humans over the past few millennia were lost or prevented from progressing. A related argument is made by those who feel that there is something special about humans’ capacity for rationality which is valuable in itself. Since humans are the only intelligent life that we know of, it would be a loss, in itself, to the world for that to end. I admit that I struggle to fully appreciate this thought. It seems to me that Henry Sidgwick was correct in thinking that these things are only important insofar as they are important to humans (Sidgwick 1874, I.IX.4).5 If there is no form of intelligent life in the future, who would there be to lament its loss since intelligent life is the only form of life capable of appreciating intelligence? Similarly, if there is no one with the rational capacity to appreciate historic monuments and civil progress, who would there be to be negatively affected or even notice the loss?6 However, even if there is nothing special about human rationality, just as some people try to prevent the extinction of nonhuman animal species, we might think that we ought also to prevent human extinction for the sake of biodiversity. The thought in this, as well as the earlier examples, must be that it would somehow be bad for the world if there were no more humans even though there would be no one for whom it is bad. This may be so but the only way to understand this reason is impersonally. Since we are concerned with wrongness rather than badness, we must ask whether something that impacts no one’s well-being, status or claims can be wrong. As we saw earlier, in the contractualist framework reasons must be personal rather than impersonal in order to provide grounds for reasonable rejection (Scanlon 1998, 218–223). Since the loss of civilization, intelligent life or biodiversity are per se impersonal reasons, there is no standpoint from which these reasons could be used to reasonably reject a principle that permitted extinction. Therefore, causing human extinction on the grounds of the loss of civilization, rational life or biodiversity would not be wrong. 2.3. Existing people would endure physical pain and/or painful and/or premature deaths Thinking about the ways in which human extinction might come about brings to the fore two more reasons it might be wrong. It could, for example, occur if all humans (or at least the critical number needed to be unable to replenish the population, leading to eventual extinction) underwent a sterilization procedure. Or perhaps it could come about due to anthropogenic climate change or a massive asteroid hitting the Earth and wiping out the species in the same way it did the dinosaurs millions of years ago. Each of these scenarios would involve significant physical and/or non-physical harms to existing people and their interests. Physically, people might suffer premature and possibly also painful deaths, for example. It is not hard to imagine examples in which the process of extinction could cause premature death. A nuclear winter that killed everyone or even just every woman under the age of 50 is a clear example of such a case. Obviously, some types of premature death themselves cannot be reasons to reject a principle. Every person dies eventually, sometimes earlier than the standard expected lifespan due to accidents or causes like spontaneously occurring incurable cancers. A cause such as disease is not a moral agent and therefore it cannot be wrong if it unavoidably kills a person prematurely. Scanlon says that the fact that a principle would reduce a person’s well-being gives that person a reason to reject the principle: ‘components of well-being figure prominently as grounds for reasonable rejection’ (Scanlon 1998, 214). However, it is not settled yet whether premature death is a setback to well-being. Some philosophers hold that death is a harm to the person who dies, whilst others argue that it is not.7 I will argue, however, that regardless of who is correct in that debate, being caused to die prematurely can be reason to reject a principle when it fails to show respect to the person as a rational agent. Scanlon says that recognizing others as rational beings with interests involves seeing reason to preserve life and prevent death: ‘appreciating the value of human life is primarily a matter of seeing human lives as something to be respected, where this involves seeing reasons not to destroy them, reasons to protect them, and reasons to want them to go well’ (Scanlon 1998, 104). The ‘respect for life’ in this case is a respect for the person living, not respect for human life in the abstract. This means that we can sometimes fail to protect human life without acting wrongfully if we still respect the person living. Scanlon gives the example of a person who faces a life of unending and extreme pain such that she wishes to end it by committing suicide. Scanlon does not think that the suicidal person shows a lack of respect for her own life by seeking to end it because the person whose life it is has no reason to want it to go on. This is important to note because it emphasizes the fact that the respect for human life is person-affecting. It is not wrong to murder because of the impersonal disvalue of death in general, but because taking someone’s life without their permission shows disrespect to that person. This supports its inclusion as a reason in the contractualist formula, regardless of what side ends up winning the ‘is death a harm?’ debate because even if death turns out not to harm the person who died, ending their life without their consent shows disrespect to that person. A person who could reject a principle permitting another to cause his or her premature death presumably does not wish to die at that time, or in that manner. Thus, if they are killed without their consent, their interests have not been taken into account, and they have a reason to reject the principle that allowed their premature death.8 This is as true in the case of death due to extinction as it is for death due to murder. However, physical pain may also be caused to existing people without killing them, but still resulting in human extinction. Imagine, for example, surgically removing everyone’s reproductive organs in order to prevent the creation of any future people. Another example could be a nuclear bomb that did not kill anyone, but did painfully render them infertile through illness or injury. These would be cases in which physical pain (through surgery or bombs) was inflicted on existing people and the extinction came about as a result of the painful incident rather than through death. Furthermore, one could imagine a situation in which a bomb (for example) killed enough people to cause extinction, but some people remained alive, but in terrible pain from injuries. It seems uncontroversial that the infliction of physical pain could be a reason to reject a principle. Although Scanlon says that an impact on well-being is not the only reason to reject principles, it plays a significant role, and indeed, most principles are likely to be rejected due to a negative impact on a person’s well-being, physical or otherwise. It may be queried here whether it is actually the involuntariness of the pain that is grounds for reasonable rejection rather than the physical pain itself because not all pain that a person suffers is involuntary. One can imagine acts that can cause physical pain that are not rejectable — base jumping or life-saving or improving surgery, for example. On the other hand, pushing someone off a cliff or cutting him with a scalpel against his will are clearly rejectable acts. The difference between the two cases is that in the former, the person having the pain inflicted has consented to that pain or risk of pain. My view is that they cannot be separated in these cases and it is involuntary physical pain that is the grounds for reasonable rejection. Thus, the fact that a principle would allow unwanted physical harm gives a person who would be subjected to that harm a reason to reject the principle. Of course the mere fact that a principle causes involuntary physical harm or premature death is not sufficient to declare that the principle is rejectable — there might be countervailing reasons. In the case of extinction, what countervailing reasons might be offered in favour of the involuntary physical pain/ death-inducing harm? One such reason that might be offered is that humans are a harm to the natural environment and that the world might be a better place if there were no humans in it. It could be that humans might rightfully be considered an all-things-considered hindrance to the world rather than a benefit to it given the fact that we have been largely responsible for the extinction of many species, pollution and, most recently, climate change which have all negatively affected the natural environment in ways we are only just beginning to understand. Thus, the fact that human extinction would improve the natural environment (or at least prevent it from degrading further), is a countervailing reason in favour of extinction to be weighed against the reasons held by humans who would experience physical pain or premature death. However, the good of the environment as described above is by definition not a personal reason. Just like the loss of rational life and civilization, therefore, it cannot be a reason on its own when determining what is wrong and countervail the strong personal reasons to avoid pain/death that is held by the people who would suffer from it.9 Every person existing at the time of the extinction would have a reason to reject that principle on the grounds of the physical pain they are being forced to endure against their will that could not be countervailed by impersonal considerations such as the negative impact humans may have on the earth. Therefore, a principle that permitted extinction to be accomplished in a way that caused involuntary physical pain or premature death could quite clearly be rejectable by existing people with no relevant countervailing reasons. This means that human extinction that came about in this way would be wrong. There are of course also additional reasons they could reject a similar principle which I now turn to address in the next section. 2.4. Existing people could endure non-physical harms I said earlier than the fact in itself that there would not be any future people is an impersonal reason and can therefore not be a reason to reject a principle permitting extinction. However, this impersonal reason could give rise to a personal reason that is admissible. So, the final important reason people might think that human extinction would be wrong is that there could be various deleterious psychological effects that would be endured by existing people having the knowledge that there would be no future generations. There are two main sources of this trauma, both arising from the knowledge that there will be no more people. The first relates to individual people and the undesired negative effect on well-being that would be experienced by those who would have wanted to have children. Whilst this is by no means universal, it is fair to say that a good proportion of people feel a strong pull towards reproduction and having their lineage continue in some way. Samuel Scheffler describes the pull towards reproduction as a ‘desire for a personalized relationship with the future’ (Scheffler 2012, 31). Reproducing is a widely held desire and the joys of parenthood are ones that many people wish to experience. For these people knowing that they would not have descendants (or that their descendants will endure painful and/or premature deaths) could create a sense of despair and pointlessness of life. Furthermore, the inability to reproduce and have your own children because of a principle/policy that prevents you (either through bans or physical interventions) would be a significant infringement of what we consider to be a basic right to control what happens to your body. For these reasons, knowing that you will have no descendants could cause significant psychological traumas or harms even if there were no associated physical harm. The second is a more general, higher level sense of hopelessness or despair that there will be no more humans and that your projects will end with you. Even those who did not feel a strong desire to procreate themselves might feel a sense of hopelessness that any projects or goals they have for the future would not be fulfilled. Many of the projects and goals we work towards during our lifetime are also at least partly future-oriented. Why bother continuing the search for a cure for cancer if either it will not be found within humans’ lifetime, and/or there will be no future people to benefit from it once it is found? Similar projects and goals that might lose their meaning when confronted with extinction include politics, artistic pursuits and even the type of philosophical work with which this paper is concerned. Even more extreme, through the words of the character Theo Faron, P.D. James says in his novel The Children of Men that ‘without the hope of posterity for our race if not for ourselves, without the assurance that we being dead yet live, all pleasures of the mind and senses sometimes seem to me no more than pathetic and crumbling defences shored up against our ruins’ (James 2006, 9). Even if James’ claim is a bit hyperbolic and all pleasures would not actually be lost, I agree with Scheffler in finding it not implausible that the knowledge that extinction was coming and that there would be no more people would have at least a general depressive effect on people’s motivation and confidence in the value of and joy in their activities (Scheffler 2012, 43). Both sources of psychological harm are personal reasons to reject a principle that permitted human extinction. Existing people could therefore reasonably reject the principle for either of these reasons. Psychological pain and the inability to pursue your personal projects, goals, and aims, are all acceptable reasons for rejecting principles in the contractualist framework. So too are infringements of rights and entitlements that we accept as important for people’s lives. These psychological reasons, then, are also valid reasons to reject principles that permitted or required human extinction.
We must not obscure the issue by characterizing this type of case as the sacrifice of individuals for some abstract "social entity." It is not a question of some persons having to bear the cost for some elusive "overall social good." Instead, the question is whether some persons must bear the inescapable cost for the sake of other persons. Nozick, for example, argues that "to use a person in this way does not sufficiently respect and take account of the fact that he is a separate person, that his is the only life he has."30 Why, however, is this not equally true of all those that we do not save through our failure to act? By emphasizing solely the one who must bear the cost if we act, one fails to sufficiently respect and take account of the many other separate persons, each with only one life, who will bear the cost of our inaction. In such a situation, what would a conscientious Kantian agent, an agent motivated by the unconditional value of rational beings, choose? We have a duty to promote the conditions necessary for the existence of rational beings, but both choosing to act and choosing not to act will cost the life of a rational being. Since the basis of Kant's principle is "rational nature exists as an end-in-itself' (GMM, p. 429), the reasonable solution to such a dilemma involves promoting, insofar as one can, the conditions necessary for rational beings. If I sacrifice some for the sake of other rational beings, I do not use them arbitrarily and I do not deny the unconditional value of rational beings. Persons may have "dignity, an unconditional and incomparable value" that transcends any market value (GMM, p. 436), but, as rational beings, persons also have a fundamental equality which dictates that some must sometimes give way for the sake of others. The formula of the end-in-itself thus does not support the view that we may never force another to bear some cost in order to benefit others. If one focuses on the equal value of all rational beings, then equal consideration dictates that one sacrifice some to save many. [continues] According to Kant, the objective end of moral action is the existence of rational beings. Respect for rational beings requires that, in deciding what to do, one give appropriate practical consideration to the unconditional value of rational beings and to the conditional value of happiness. Since agent-centered constraints require a non-value-based rationale, the most natural interpretation of the demand that one give equal respect to all rational beings lead to a consequentialist normative theory. We have seen that there is no sound Kantian reason for abandoning this natural consequentialist interpretation. In particular, a consequentialist interpretation does not require sacrifices which a Kantian ought to consider unreasonable, and it does not involve doing evil so that good may come of it. It simply requires an uncompromising commitment to the equal value and equal claims of all rational beings and a recognition that, in the moral consideration of conduct, one's own subjective concerns do not have overriding importance
If major interstate war is predominantly a product of a synergy between a potential nondemocratic aggressor and an absence of effective deterrence, what is the role of the many traditional "causes" of war? Past, and many contemporary, theories of war have focused on the role of specific disputes between nations, ethnic and religious differences, arms races, poverty or social injustice, competition for resources, incidents and accidents, greed, fear, and perceptions of "honor," or many other such factors. Such factors may well play a role in motivating aggression or in serving as a means for generating fear and manipulating public opinion. The reality, however, is that while some of these may have more potential to contribute to war than others, there may well be an infinite set of motivating factors, or human wants, motivating aggression. It is not the independent existence of such motivating factors for war but rather the circumstances permitting or encouraging high risk decisions leading to war that is the key to more effectively controlling war. And the same may also be true of democide. The early focus in the Rwanda slaughter on "ethnic conflict," as though Hutus and Tutsis had begun to slaughter each other through spontaneous combustion, distracted our attention from the reality that a nondemocratic Hutu regime had carefully planned and orchestrated a genocide against Rwandan Tutsis as well as its Hutu opponents.I1 Certainly if we were able to press a button and end poverty, racism, religious intolerance, injustice, and endless disputes, we would want to do so. Indeed, democratic governments must remain committed to policies that will produce a better world by all measures of human progress. The broader achievement of democracy and the rule of law will itself assist in this progress. No one, however, has yet been able to demonstrate the kind of robust correlation with any of these "traditional" causes of war as is reflected in the "democratic peace." Further, given the difficulties in overcoming many of these social problems, an approach to war exclusively dependent on their solution may be to doom us to war for generations to come.
More than six months after the Trump administration rolled out a new set of regulations promising to make it easier to sell American-made military drones abroad, no new sales have been made, and drone-makers are frustrated by the lack of concrete results.
Whatever the potential motivations for trying to codify international rules for using UAVs, such a move would be ill advised. While in theory, every nation that signs onto a treaty governing UAVs will be bound by its requirements, it is unlikely to play out this way in practice. It strains credulity to assume that China, Russia, Iran, and other non-democratic actors will not selectively apply (at best) such rules to themselves while using them as a cudgel with which to bash their rivals and score political points. The United States and its democratic allies, meanwhile, are more likely to adhere to the commitments for which they signed up. The net result: we are boxed in as far as our own self-defense, while other nations with less regard for the rule of law go use their UAVs to take out whomever, whenever, contorting said “rules” as they see fit. One need only look at China’s manipulation of the Law of the Sea Treaty to justify its vast territorial claims at the expense of its neighbors to see how this often plays out. And who would enforce the treaty’s rules — a third party tribunal? Would it be an apparatus of the United Nations, the same U.N. that assures us that it is not coming after the United States or its allies specifically, even as its investigation takes on as its “immediate focus” UAV operations recently conducted by those countries? The United States already conducts warfare under the norms of centuries of practice of customary international law in areas such as military necessity and proportionality, as well as the norms to which we committed ourselves when we became party to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the United Nations Charter. These same rules can adequately cover the use of UAVs in the international context. But if the United States were to create or agree to a separate international regime for UAVs, we would subject ourselves to new, politicized “rules” that would needlessly hold back countries that already use UAVs responsibly, while empowering those that do not. America is in the midst of an important conversation about UAVs. President Obama should state unambiguously that we will not invite others to dictate its outcome.
Other critics contend that by the United States using drones, it leads other countries into making and using them. For example, Medea Benjamin, the cofounder of the anti-war activist group CODEPINK and author of a book about drones argues that, “The proliferation of drones should evoke reﬂection on the precedent that the United States is setting by killing anyone it wants, anywhere it wants, on the basis of secret information. Other nations and non-state entities are watching—and are bound to start acting in a similar fashion.”60 Indeed scores of countries are now manufacturing or purchasing drones. There can be little doubt that the fact that drones have served the United States well has helped to popularize them. However, it does not follow that United States should not have employed drones in the hope that such a show of restraint would deter others. First of all, this would have meant that either the United States would have had to allow terrorists in hardto-reach places, say North Waziristan, to either roam and rest freely—or it would have had to use bombs that would have caused much greater collateral damage.
By asserting that “we’re” creating it, this is a claim that there is an arms race among states over military drones, and that it is a consequence of the US creating the technology and deploying it — and then, beyond the technology, changing the normative legal and moral rules in the international community about using it across borders. In effect, the combination of those two, technological and normative, forces other countries in strategic competition with the US to follow suit. It sounds like it must be true. But is it? There are a number of reasons to doubt that moves by other countries are an arms race in the sense that the US “created” it or could have stopped it, or that something different would have happened had the US not pursued the technology or not used it in the ways it has against non-state terrorist actors. Here are a couple of quick reasons why I don’t find this thesis very persuasive, and what I think the real “arms race” surrounding drones will be. Unmanned aerial vehicles have clearly got a big push from the US military in the way of research, development, and deployment. But the reality today is that the technology will transform civil aviation, in many of the same ways and for the same reasons that another robotic technology, driverless cars (which Google is busily plying up and down the streets of San Francisco, but which started as a DARPA project), will eventually have an important place in ordinary ground transport. UAVs will eventually move into many roles in ordinary aviation, because it is cheaper, relatively safer, more reliable — and it will eventually include cargo planes, crop dusting, border patrol, forest fire patrols, and many other tasks. There is a reason for this — the avionics involved are simply not so complicated as to be beyond the abilities of many, many states. Military applications will carry drones many different directions, from next-generation unmanned fighter aircraft able to operate against other craft at much higher G stresses to tiny surveillance drones. But the flying-around technology for aircraft that are generally sizes flown today is not that difficult, and any substantial state that feels like developing them will be able to do so. But the point is that this was happening anyway, and the technology was already available. The US might have been first, but it hasn’t sparked an arms race in any sense that absent the US push, no one would have done this. That’s just a fantasy reading of where the technology in general aviation was already going; Zenko’s ‘original sin’ attribution of this to the US opening Pandora’s box is not a credible understanding of the development and applications of the technology. Had the US not moved on this, the result would have been a US playing catch-up to someone else. For that matter, the off-the-shelf technology for small, hobbyist UAVs is simple enough and available enough that terrorists will eventually try to do their own amateur version, putting some kind of bomb on it. Moving on from the avionics, weaponizing the craft is also not difficult. The US stuck an anti-tank missile on a Predator; this is also not rocket science. Many states can build drones, many states can operate them, and crudely weaponizing them is also not rocket science. The US didn’t spark an arms race; this would occur to any state with a drone. To the extent that there is real development here, it lies in the development of specialized weapons that enable vastly more discriminating targeting. The details are sketchy, but there are indications from DangerRoom and other observers (including some comments from military officials off the record) that US military budgets include amounts for much smaller missiles designed not as anti-tank weapons, but to penetrate and kill persons inside a car without blowing it to bits, for example. This is genuinely harder to do — but still not all that difficult for a major state, whether leading NATO states, China, Russia, or India. The question is whether it would be a bad thing to have states competing to come up with weapons technologies that are … more discriminating.
Currently, available data suggest that the trend of maritime interactions in the seas of East Asia is mirroring that seen during and after the Cold War. This would indicate that sustained low-level instability will continue to characterize the strategic picture, but that escalation is unlikely.
In recent years, the seas of East Asia have witnessed frequent clashes among naval, coast guard, and paramilitary vessels and civilian actors. This has created academic and policy concerns regarding the potential for significant escalation in the region. This article argues that low-level instability is to be expected with maritime boundary disputes or when power competition occurs at sea; however, sustained escalatory cycles are unlikely, because of the characteristics of the maritime strategic environment. The maritime theater possesses unique strategic characteristics. These include the nature of potential strategic threats, the speed of response, and quick attribution of responsibility. These characteristics reduce the potential for escalation and allow de-escalatory strategies to achieve greater success. These findings demonstrate that the maritime sphere in East Asia is more stable than is commonly thought.
This type of deployment of military and civilian maritime law-enforcement actors to contested maritime zones has not yet resulted in substantial levels of escalation. The three earliest cases described above each ended with a political solution, while the fourth, between South Korea and Japan, has resulted in sustained but low-level instability characterized by the periodic dispatch of military and civilian law-enforcement assets to indicate the respective country’s claims.
Escalation is rendered less likely by the often-opaque nature of incidents at sea. The difficulty of attribution following incidents at sea, something that is magnified in the case of submarine operations, reduces the escalatory potential of an incident, even one as serious as the sinking of a vessel. 28 Richard Smoke argues in his analysis of the Italian submarine campaign of 1937 that because of the anonymous character of submarine warfare, “[t]he immediate and direct connection to the responsible nation in this sense was broken, and the probability of a response directly against Italy reduced.” 29
The South China Sea (SCS) tensions have recently taken centre stage. By contrast, the East China Sea (ECS) receded to the background. This could be attributed to the de-escalation of tensions—the ramming of a Japan Coast Guard (JCG) vessel by a Chinese trawler off the disputed Senkaku/ Diaoyu Islands in September 2010, followed by Tokyo’s move to nationalise the isles in September 2012—following the Four-Point Agreement (4PA) reached between the two countries in November 2014 (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China 2014; Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan 2014a), and, later, a brief meeting between President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on the side-lines of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Summit. Since then, the otherwise chilly Sino-Japanese relations began to thaw and bilateral official exchanges, suspended in late 2012, were gradually restored. This rapprochement should not have come across as surprising. Fravel (2010), for example, argued that the US-Japan alliance has deterred China from using force, while active dispute management by China and Japan has limited the potential for escalation, yet the perceived value of the islands and the limited benefits to be gained through compromise create strong incentives to avoid efforts to settle the dispute; therefore, both countries adopt a delaying strategy that defers settlement to the future. Yet this form of active dispute management appears to be unique in itself, unlike what could be observed elsewhere within the broader, so- called Asia-Pacific security architecture revolving around the centrality of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Notwithstanding Tokyo’s attempts, for instance, having a joint statement with ASEAN which included calls for freedom of overflight after Beijing promulgated an air defence identification zone (ADIZ) in November 2013 (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan 2013), there had been no inroads to address Sino-Japanese differences using ASEAN-centric platforms. In no small part this is also due to China’s insistence towards keeping problems with Japan off the ASEAN agenda, for example, opposing Tokyo’s raising of SCS issues with ASEAN—a move which Beijing views as meddling. It is therefore not presumptuous to assess that regional institutions, such as ASEAN, may not wield influence over Sino-Japanese rapprochement. One other area of difference has been both countries’ tendencies towards habitual application of gunboat diplomacy, defined by Cable (1994, p. 14) as “the use or threat of limited naval force, otherwise than as an act of war, in order to secure advantage, or to avert loss, either in the furtherance of an international dispute or else against foreign nationals within the territory or the jurisdiction of their own state”—which was not observed within ASEAN. The last such serious ASEAN analogue took place in 2009 between the naval forces of Indonesia and Malaysia over the disputed Ambalat hydrocarbon block in the Celebes Sea. Since then, both governments had refrained from repeating this episode. Finally, it needs pointing out that the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES), reached in the Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS) in 2014 as an instrument to mitigate close-proximity naval encounters, is well outside ASEAN’s purview even though it involves some of the regional bloc’s navies, and those of China and Japan. Mutual wariness continues to plague Sino-Japanese relations. While neither Beijing nor Tokyo seriously contemplates armed confrontation over deep-seated, intractable differences that see no sight of being satisfactorily resolved in the foreseeable future, none of them wishes to back down either. The post-4PA rapprochement continues to be punctuated with political rhetoric and exercise of gunboat diplomacy in the ECS. Notably, the proposed “Maritime and Aerial Communication Mechanism” (hereafter the Mechanism)—first mooted in 2012 before tensions brewed up—as a means of ameliorating the risk of inadvertent Sino-Japanese incidents remains in limbo at the time of writing. Clearly, however, even at the height of tensions, Sino-Japanese provocations did not escalate into outright shooting war despite the suspension of official exchanges including those in the defence realm. How was that possible? This chapter argues that given the ECS dispute constitutes a symptom of broader, longstanding Sino-Japanese mutual suspicions and rivalry, prospects of realising and effectively implementing negotiated confidence- and security-building measures (CSBMs) appear bleak. Therefore, both countries would likely persist in practising a loose combination of CSBMs—through “backdoor diplomacy” and unilateral naval restraint—as a means of containing tensions. It needs pointing out that this chapter does not comprise a historical background of the Sino-Japanese dispute; there is a rich, existing plethora of literature on that.1 This chapter also focuses only on more recent developments following September 2012. The discussion unfolds in the following manner. First, the current ECS situation post-4PA will be outlined, before examining the limitations of defence diplomacy and the much broader notion of CSBMs, thereby viewing the prospects of realising the Mechanism in perspective. This leads to an examination of unilateral naval restraint—an area which is often overshadowed by negotiated CSBMs— and how this combines with “backdoor diplomacy” to foster stability in the ECS. The chapter concludes by briefly looking at those broader issues that have long bedevilled Sino-Japanese relations and putting into question the possible realisation and efficacy of negotiated CSBMs.
The most pertinent question to ask is whether Beijing and Tokyo desire war. The powerful CCP Central Committee Politburo’s Standing Committee, led by Xi, reached a consensus that China has “no intention of fighting with Japan and Japan does not have the courage to fight with China” and thereby endorsed a basic principle of preventing military clash with Tokyo (Kyodo 2014). NSC chief Shotaro Yachi opined that some on the Chinese side were thinking in a “realistic and rational” way, though he also cautioned that given the lack of transparency in Beijing’s decision-making process “maybe China will not go along with that (realistic and rational) policy, so we have to prepare” (Sieg 2013). But even if both governments stuck to their guns regarding their differences, they clearly have no intention to escalate the situation to a point of no return. Economic interdependence constitutes an enduring disincentive against war. A good example was the anti-Japanese demonstrations which broke out in China amid calls to boycott Japanese products after Tokyo nationalised the isles, resulting in the shuttering of businesses by some Japanese firms in the country. The economic consequences were keenly felt, such that within barely a year bilateral economic ties regained normalcy. Slightly over a year after tensions flared up, Chinese tour groups to Japan during National Day holidays swelled by up to 130 per cent from the previous year (Kyodo 2013e). Leading Japanese automakers saw surging sales in China; Toyota’s sales in November 2013, for example, increased by 40.7 per cent, even better than results before bilateral ties soured post- September 2012 (Agence France Presse 2013). Japanese megabanks expanded in China in July 2014, following temporary decline in loans in the latter half of 2012 (Nikkei 2014). Evidently, both governments judged there is more to lose if their dispute escalates beyond control. The economic stakes involved meant that war is unthinkable. Given the intractability of bilateral differences, suspension of official contacts and exchanges, and challenges in negotiating CSBMs such as the Mechanism, there needs to be alternative “pressure valves”. These come in the form of a loose hodgepodge of CSBMs, comprising semi-official, often “behind-the-scenes” exchanges by officials or key politicians (i.e. “backdoor diplomacy”) and unilateral naval restraint. The first is often overlooked but played a crucial role in facilitating present rapprochement. It is not presumptuous to highlight that both 4PA and the Xi-Abe meeting in November 2014 were attributed to “backdoor diplomacy” as shown in Table 11.5. Notwithstanding Beijing’s insistence that official contacts were being suspended, some of these “unofficial contacts” were in fact official given the capacities of many of these emissaries. The issue of what constitutes “official” is therefore debatable. Equally important has been both countries’ attempt to exercise unilateral naval restraint in their application of gunboat diplomacy, an observation often overshadowed by the limelight on negotiated CSBMs such as the Mechanism. Existing studies on arms control and CSBMs mainly focused on negotiated measures, but there has been much less attention on unilateral measures—a kind of tacit arms control comprising structural or operational or mixed measures, and can be adopted by individual states without having to enter into negotiations and restrictive regimes. Fieldhouse (1990, pp. 8–9) suggests unilateral measures as: National (or alliance) decisions or policies to take or not to take certain action in order to improve the military or political situation with respect to naval forces and international security. These decisions could be communicated or publicized in the hope of encouraging a similar or reciprocal action or self-restraint from another nation or to facilitate arms control. There is a wide variety of options in the naval arena, from national decisions on procurement, force structure or choice of armament, to naval strategies, deployment patterns and policies concerning ‘gunboat diplomacy’. Unilateral measures not only enhance mutual security but potentially pave the way for future negotiated regimes (Fieldhouse 1990, pp. 26–27). But the onus falls on individual states to exercise circumspection in procurement, force structural development pathways and force deployment. Unilateral measures also have problems, such as verification and ease of reversal (to the detriment of other states) (Durch 1992, p. 27; Kulagin 1992, p. 135). Nevertheless, China and Japan practised unilateral restraint in varying degrees as one way of actively managing their disputes. During an interview, Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Masahisa Sato alluded to unilateral measures saying that “we will have those on-site continue to exercise restraint to prevent tensions from escalating”, referring to the maritime forces operating in the ECS (Dow Jones 2013).9 Chinese coastguard patrols did not immediately challenge the sacrosanct 12-nautical mile territorial waters of the isles after the September-2010 trawler incident; most of the time staying respectfully within the adjacent contiguous zone. Only after Tokyo nationalized the isles, Chinese coastguard patrols began to intrude more regularly into the territorial waters. On Tokyo’s part, JCG patrols issued warnings whenever their Chinese counterparts appeared to sail close to the territorial waters. Even after Chinese coastguards disregarded their warnings, JCG patrols did not escalate to such incendiary actions as ship ramming, much less fire warning shots. Closer examination of those instances of gunboat diplomacy reveals the deliberate choices of forces employed—akin to a unilateral form of constraint measure which is difficult to negotiate. Civilian forces such as coastguards are arguably less destabilizing compared to heavily armed naval vessels. As seen in Fig. 11.1, from 1980 until the trawler incident, China employed mostly naval forces, mainly attributed to the fact that unlike the PLAN, civilian forces did not then muster adequate capacity to conduct operations in the distant ECS open waters. Following the trawler incident, civilian forces took over the frontline role.10 At the peak of tensions post-September 2012, coastguards far outweighed naval forces in Beijing’s regularised gunboat diplomacy, and this trend persisted after 4PA. However, a disturbing trend is that although the PLAN was less active post-September 2010, Beijing started employing more destabilising, offensive sea control-type naval assets—even after 4PA, as seen in the sudden increased presence of intelligence-gathering vessels in late 2015 off Japanese coasts and the isles. The presence of such vessels compelled Tokyo to threaten MSDF deployment in the Senkaku/Diaoyu waters (Kyodo 2016b), after a PLAN frigate entered the isles’ contiguous zone for the first time (Mainichi 2016).11 Undeterred, Beijing even justified as “innocent passage” the sailing of a PLAN intelligence-gathering vessel through Tokara Strait, which it defined as “a strait within territorial waters used for international navigation”, to Japan’s chagrin (Xinhua 2016a; Asia & Japan Watch 2016).
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The Trump administration has moved ahead with a surveillance drone sale to four U.S. allies in the South China Sea region as acting Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan said Washington will no longer "tiptoe" around Chinese behaviour in Asia. The drones would afford greater intelligence gathering capabilities potentially curbing Chinese activity in the region. Shanahan did not directly name China when making accusations of "actors" destabilising the region in a speech at the annual Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore on Saturday but went on to say the United States would not ignore Chinese behaviour. The Pentagon announced on Friday it would sell 34 ScanEagle drones, made by Boeing Co. to the governments of Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam for a total of $47 million. China claims almost all of the strategic South China Sea and frequently lambastes the United States and its allies over naval operations near Chinese-occupied islands. Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam have competing claims. The Pentagon said Friday's sales included spare and repair parts, support equipment, tools, training and technical services and work on the equipment was expected to be completed by March 2022. As many as 12 unarmed drones and equipment would go to Malaysia for about $19 million. Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim-majority country would buy eight drones, the Philippines eight, and Vietnam six. In 2018, U.S. President Donald Trump's administration rolled out a long-awaited overhaul of U.S. arms export policy aimed at expanding sales to allies, saying it would bolster the American defence industry and create jobs at home. That initiative eased rules for exporting some types of lethal as well as non-lethal U.S.-made drones to potentially dozens more allies and partners. There is no armed version of the ScanEagle, but Insitu, the division of Boeing that makes the drone, also makes the RQ-21A Blackjack which is an optionally armed drone used by U.S. Navy and Marine Corps.
University political science Prof. Ashutosh Varshney becomes animated when asked about the likelihood of nuclear war between India and Pakistan. "Odds are close to zero," Varshney said forcefully, standing up to pace a little bit in his office. "The assumption that India and Pakistan cannot manage their nuclear arsenals as well as the U.S.S.R. and U.S. or Russia and China concedes less to the intellect of leaders in both India and Pakistan than would be warranted." The worlds two youngest nuclear powers first tested weapons in 1998, sparking fear of subcontinental nuclear war a fear Varshney finds ridiculous. "The decision makers are aware of what nuclear weapons are, even if the masses are not," he said. "Watching the evening news, CNN, I think they have vastly overstated the threat of nuclear war," political science Prof. Paul Huth said. Varshney added that there are numerous factors working against the possibility of nuclear war. "India is committed to a  no-first-strike policy," Varshney said. "It is virtually impossible for Pakistan to go for a  first strike, because the retaliation would be gravely dangerous." Political science Prof. Kenneth Lieberthal, a former special assistant to President Clinton at the National Security Council, agreed. "Usually a country that is in the position that Pakistan is in would not shift to a level that would ensure their total destruction," Lieberthal said, making note of India"s considerably larger nuclear arsenal. "American intervention is another reason not to expect nuclear war," Varshney said. "If anything has happened since September 11, it is that the command control system has strengthened. The trigger is in very safe hands."
Pakistan does "not want to go towards war" with India, its military spokesman said Wednesday, hours after Islamabad said it shot down two Indian warplanes in its airspace, igniting fears of an all-out conflict between the nuclear-armed neighbors. "We do not want escalation, we do not want to go towards war," Major General Asif Ghafoor told a press conference in the garrison city of Rawalpindi, calling for talks with New Delhi. He added that two Indian pilots had been captured, with one in custody and one in hospital. Ghafoor said the jets had been shot down after Pakistani planes earlier Wednesday flew across the Line of Control, the de facto border in disputed Kashmir, to the Indian side in a show of strength, hitting non-military targets including supply depots. Afterwards, he said, the two Indian planes crossed the LoC into Pakistani airspace. "The Pakistan Air Force was ready, they took them on, there was an engagement. As a result both the Indian planes were shot down and the wreckage of one fell on our side while the wreckage of the other fell on their side," he said. Indian sources confirmed Pakistani fighter jets had violated airspace over Indian Kashmir, but said they were forced back over the LoC, and there was no immediate response to the claim the planes had been shot down. The incident is the latest in a dangerous sequence of events between the two countries, whose ties have been under intense strain since a February 14 suicide bombing in Indian Kashmir that killed 40 troops.
Perhaps America’s luck is finally running out. There is reason to believe that the mediocrity of American strategic leadership is now imperiling the country’s inherited strategic advantages. The crises facing the United States today are not new, but they appear to be reaching a historical tipping point because of the accumulated costs of past decisions, the density of current challenges, and, above all, the stagnation of American policy-making. Simply stated, the United States is operating in an incredibly difficult international environment with extensive commitments but limited reserves, and even more limited readiness at home to adjust to these circumstances. These pressures are not transitory, but the consequence of long-term trends that are unlikely to reverse themselves in the near future. The accumulated and current pressures on the United States do not make a strategic tip inevitable, but they make a serious consideration of new policy options and assumptions imperative. That is the motivation for this book. The United States remains a wealthy and dynamic society that can spend more on its security than any of its peers. The United States also continues to support a more powerful military than most of its competitors combined. American military and communications technologies are, in many cases, at least one and often two generations ahead of others. The United States consistently deploys more advanced weapons in larger numbers and with the better-trained operators than our adversaries. That will not change in coming years. American military expenditures are high in absolute terms, but remain at a historically sustainable level of about five percent of gross national product. The trouble is not that the United States spends too little on the military, but that it may have too many commitments both at home and abroad. There are a dizzying number of latent demands on American force across the globe; and while political realities make it unlikely that American military spending will rise dramatically in the foreseeable future, no conceivably sustainable military budget could ensure that all American commitments are simultaneously protected. American ships patrol all the major waterways of the world, American bases constitute what one scholar calls a global “archipelago” of facilities, and American aircraft fly daily missions (manned and unmanned) above virtually all terrain. Basic American military operations are ubiquitous, they are labor intensive, and they are expensive. Within a political climate that demands an “all-volunteer” force, there is little available capacity in the incredibly large American military for multiplying regional conflicts that demand additional personnel and capacities. For all its extraordinary size and skill, the American military can easily become overstretched. It might have reached that point already. In conflicts like those in Iraq and Afghanistan—and now a new war against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, as well as other terrorist groups—US armed forces quickly find themselves spread too thin to accomplish strategic aims. The civilians who direct American policy—including the president, the secretaries of state and defense, and the national security advisor—find themselves in perpetual crisis mode, reacting to new demands rather than thinking systematically about strategic priorities. Another inherited burden on resources is demographic. As Cindy Williams argues, although the United States does not confront population decline (as in Europe and East Asia), the country faces ballooning health and retirement obligations that are crowding out other investments. After a half-century when the United States has fielded the largest peacetime military force in its history, it is now obligated to finance higher economic transfer payments to veterans than ever before. An all-volunteer military compounds these problems because volunteers demand more long-term benefits for retention. These expenses are threatening to break the Pentagon’s budget, just as they are producing exorbitant national debt obligations. The American military, like other major civilian institutions, is asked to address a growing number of current commitments and crises while it must devote a higher proportion of its resources than ever before to personnel who are no longer active. We may be at a tipping point where inherited costs undermine current investments. Defense Secretaries Robert Gates and Leon Panetta both articulated these urgent points, as they called for more restraint in American military commitments and serious reform in health and retirement entitlements. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mike Mullen made the clearest public statement about these resource challenges. In September 2011, on the eve of another recurring budget battle in Congress, he told a group of business executives that the “biggest threat to our national security is our debt.” Mullen focused on the higher costs for capital equipment and “increases in pay, and especially increases in the cost of health care.” Mullen closed his candid statement with a clear call for greater restraint in American military commitments and more attention to the prudent reallocation of resources: “We must consider the world as it is -- the threats as we see them -- not wishing away the danger nor blowing it out of proportion,” Mullen said. “Pragmatism and practicality must be our watchwords moving forward,” he added, “[and] strategy must become our acumen.” Despite the enormous influence of Gates, Panetta, and Mullen, these figures failed to make serious headway on reform. American policy-makers in the Bush and Obama administrations were more cautious about intervening in foreign conflicts after long frustrating months of combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, but they have not shown any serious willingness to reduce costly inherited commitments around the world. If anything, the “Asian pivot” has created a new obligation to increase the American land, sea, and air presence in Asia, while maintaining military hegemony in the Persian Gulf, Western Europe, and all major waterways around the globe. Civil wars and territorial disputes throughout East and South Asia, North Africa, and the Middle East threaten to suck in further American military forces, based on security guarantees that the United States has inherited, in some cases, from the early years of the Cold War. Resource pressures demand some degree of American retrenchment, but political calculations push policy-makers to avoid all the difficult trade-offs. Without attention to tradeoffs, there can be no coherent strategy. Perversely, the across-the-board sequester budget cuts of 2013 reinforced the resource problem because they exclude reductions to entitlements, they leave inherited obligations in place, and they are accompanied by the increasing demands on American security forces around Syria, North Korea, Libya, Somalia, and other international trouble-spots. The sequester simply asks the American military, and all other government agencies, to do more with less. This is a recipe for even greater overstretch and under-achievement in American foreign policy. This is also a recipe for more strategic blunders like the Iraq War of 2003, where ambitious policy aims were accompanied by clearly insufficient resource commitments. Observing the widening mismatch between ambitions and resources, numerous commentators have focused on the dysfunctional elements of American domestic politics. Neither partisanship nor politicization of foreign policy are new, but the heightened elements of both phenomena press dangerously on current resource vulnerabilities. It looks, at times (especially during the government shutdown and threatened default of October 2013), like a perfect storm. The political posturing of American international dominance is blowing hard against the weakened walls of available American capabilities and domestic support. American military personnel, diplomats, and other officials are now spread so thin that one must question whether they can continue to perform basic functions with the competence citizens expect. High standards of quality usually decline when personnel are asked to do more with less. The natural tendency is to cover-up seemingly small holes in capabilities until they are exposed in disastrous fashion. There is an accompanying urge to silence warnings about potential shortfalls in fulfilling required missions. This has been the experience for other government agencies under similar conditions in the past. Why should we expect US military, security, and diplomatic agencies to be immune to this dynamic? How can we hope to maintain the high standards we demand for international and domestic security when ambitions and resources are misaligned? The rising levels of suicide, depression, and violence within the military services are already a sign of serious internal troubles. The on-the-ground difficulties in Iraq and Afghanistan were another powerful warning. We have entered an era when rigid domestic political demands, coupled with multiplying foreign challenges, constrain the strongest military in the world. These changes render the current crisis in American foreign policy more serious and difficult to ignore than those America has faced since the end of the Cold War. If the United States benefitted from enormous strategic fortune in the past, as Bismarck observed, it appears to confront an unfortunate dynamic in the early twenty-first century: expanding international activities with an ever-more constrained and polarized domestic base. This situation cannot continue for very long in a democratic system without a major strategic reevaluation. American political leaders need to be able to maintain a security strategy that both serves American interests and values, and is acceptable to the democracy. Our book hopes to contribute to this process in a reasoned and measured way. We can expect less reason and measure if change is required after a public catastrophe, perhaps something larger than the 11 September 2001 attacks, Hurricane Katrina, or the frustrating war in Iraq. Strategic change is most effective when it begins before a catastrophe, giving policymakers the chance to anticipate and mitigate future threats. Otherwise, rapid catastrophe-driven reform is likely to prove counter-productive, and maybe too little, too late.
The assumption underlying HST that a single hegemonic leader is necessary for effective international cooperation (to uphold the existing international institutions of “order” and ensure the stability of the global capitalist economic system) was questioned by Keohane in his 1984 book After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy. In this book, Keohane (2005) argues, “it might be possible, after the decline of hegemonic regimes, for most symmetrical patterns of cooperation to evolve after a transitional period of discord”. Keohane uses game theory to show that spontaneous cooperation can emerge even among egoists and in the absence of common government, but “the extent of such cooperation will depend on the existence of international institutions, or international regimes, with particular characteristics” (2005, p. 13). The possibility of effective international cooperation continuing or even blossoming “after hegemony” is reinforced by the complementary nature of hegemony and international regimes. These can both make agreements possible, and facilitate continuing compliance with the rules established in this system of world order. Keohane thus made it clear that in his analysis there is no need to expect a serious historical decline in international cooperation in the 1980s, 1990s or beyond, even as the dominance of the US within the system undergoes gradual decline. The ‘system’ itself will not collapse into a state of chaos or disorder. On the contrary, there is a real prospect that vital post-war international norms, institutions, and practices will not only continue, but will even be strengthened. This is a condition he refers to as “non-hegemonic cooperation” (Keohane, 2005, p. 79). Keohane’s optimistic account of the development and maintenance of co-operation after hegemony rests, however, on a view of states-as-rational-egoists. He concretely considers instances of international cooperation in fields such as monetary policy and the oil sector, as an iterated prisoner’s dilemma (PD) game (following Axelrod, 1984). He extends his analysis to cover the impact of ethics, power, and institutions on international co-operation. According to Keohane, tit-for-tat is the best strategy in an iterated PD-game. However, a large number of players, asymmetric information, moral hazard and irresponsibility often complicates the situation. On the other hand, multiple parallel games in many issue areas, the unequal nature of inter-state relations (in terms of power: only some states really count), and the existence of established international organizations can alleviate these problems. “Thus intensive interaction among a few players helps to substitute for, or to supplement, the actions of a hegemon. As a hegemon’s power erodes, a gradual shift may take place from hegemonic to non-hegemonic cooperation. Increasingly, incentives to cooperate will depend not only on the hegemon’s responses but also on those of other sizeable states. Such a transition may be difficult in practice, since expectations may lag behind reality; but nothing in rational choice analysis renders it impossible” (Keohane, 2005, p. 79). Keohane has not been alone in envisaging the possibility of future international cooperation without a single hegemon. For instance Oran Young (1989; 1991), although he retains the view of states-as-rational-egoists, has considered various forms of initiative and leadership also in creating new regimes of cooperation, including intellectual leadership. Peter Haas (1989; 1992) goes beyond the state-economism of Keohane and many others8 and argues that there are transnational communities of experts, who share epistemic standpoints, and who are able to take part in the process of interest and identity formation both within states as well as within the regional or global level, often facilitating cooperation. Moreover, rules and institutional arrangements are important, because they enable and facilitate learning that can, and often does, lead to the convergence of the policies of states. For instance, along the lines of this perspective, John Ikenberry suggests that the origin of the Bretton Woods system should not be seen merely in terms of the “structural” power of the US but also in terms of an epistemic community of British and US economists and policy specialists, which fostered the Anglo-American agreement (Ikenberry, 1992).
In response to a speech given by Obama in 2013 on his administration’s counterterrorism policy, popularly referred to as his “drone speech,” General William Nash commented that Obama “has begun the transition from a perpetual war to a more normalized security framework.”[1] I address this normalization of the categorization and control of life within a global threatscape. Much of the debate at policy level, in academia, and on the flickering screens of media outlets surrounding the contemporary fixture of the counterterror arsenal, the drone, focuses upon the legal and ethical implications. Administration officials continually stress the need for “transparency” and the president’s wish that the United States hold itself to “the highest possible standards” in the conduct of a just, humanitarian war—reminding us this is indeed a war, against an organization and its affiliates.[2] A war that demands secrecy, resilience, determination, and principles to win. Beyond the moralistic musings of the liberal conscience, Michael Dillon and Julian Reid point to an analysis of the martial activity of liberalism as exposing the distinct liberal power relations of biopolitics, founded in belligerence.[3] Considered the humanitarian and surgical weapon of asymmetry par excellence by advocates of drone warfare, this paper unsettles such claims, exploring the biopoliticization of U.S. (inter)national security. I argue that the supposed humanity of the drone is dependent upon the dehumanization and depoliticization of those deemed (potentially) threatening to the liberal way of life. I begin by discussing drones as a tool of a warfare with a global reach that seeks to regulate and control life.
Colonialist practice has always exploited the construction of colonialized subject as the impure, dirty other. This dichotomy sets up the colonizer as an agent of civilization, as a force of purity, something capable of ‘cleaning up’ the backwards savagery of the colonized. To quote one colonial administrator, “Imperial cleanliness is developed by sanitation… colonising by means of the known laws of cleanliness rather than military force.”xii Yet the military dimension always reveals itself: the application of the “known laws of cleanliness” never lands far from the utilization of violence, especially when the colonizing processes transforms into a vast exercise in counter-insurgency. Deployed against a given population, this combination of militarized pressure and hygienic concerns become a tool of managerial control by erecting borders, separating certain parts of the population from others, and attempting to impose a sense of rational management, as an impulse for individuals to carry out the processes of ‘imperial cleanliness’ upon themselves. Such discourses pepper Israeli colonialism, described by Weizman as “a common national-territorial imagination that sees the presence of Palestinians as a ‘defiled’ substance within the ‘Israeli’ landscape, or as ‘matter out of place’…”xiii As always, these notions of racial and cultural purity operate in the service of orders of power that turn not only outward, but inward as well. Castigating the Other and seeking to limit the entry of the Other into a given system assists command-and-control systems in their bid to maintain dominance. Simply put: less variables in play reduces the amount of complexity, and thus allows governance to proceed more smoothly. Despite its high-tech accouterments, discipline is still fairly rudimentary in its internal mechanics: it is an affair of arranging bodies in space, regulating their movements, and making them productive. The promotion of homogeneous identities and homogeneous cultures becomes a blunt object with which the state will try to beat down complexity with, to render it inert and malleable, lest the flood wash away the organized body and the system it is moored within. The traditionalist anxiety of ‘losing the body’ extends not only to unfamiliar, foreign bodies, but to the great urban assemblages that house so many. As urban spaces transform into sprawling metropolises that harbor the majority of human beings on the planet, the military has begun to take note. In October of 2016, a leaked video circulated for training purposes by the US State Department’s Joint Special Operations Command went viral on the internet. Titled “Megacities: Urban Futures, the Emerging Complexity”, the video revealed paranoia on the part of the armed forces by the tendency towards hyper-urbanization, particularly in the global south. “Megacities are complex systems where people and structures are compressed together in ways that defy our understandings of city planning and military doctrine. These are future breeding grounds, incubators, and launching pads for adversaries and hybrid threats.”xiv As an additional report noted, the “U.S. army is incapable of operating within the megacity.” The video continues to bemoan not only the labyrinthine nature that spontaneous urbanization is taking, but the loss of control of infrastructures by ‘legitimate’ political actors (ie, city and state governments). Noting the zig-zagging, nonlinear chains of cause and effect that spiral without warning through our anthropocenic reality, fears over climate-induced multiplier effects are foregrounded by the Pentagon’s warriors. In the megacity, the orderly logic of civilization appears to breakdown, and the fusion of autonomous infrastructures and rapid development appear as forces indistinguishable from natural disasters. Urbanization, then, poses a crisis for control systems – and thus calls for the creation of new tools and techniques for power to reassert itself. Such fears are not new. As far back as the 1990s, planners at the RAND Corporation warned of the coming era of “urban insurgency” and the lack of an adequate means an “urban counter-insurgency”. In 2002, Air Force Captain Troy Thomas wrote in an article for the Aerospace Power Journal that “Rapid urbanization in developing countries results in a battlespace environment that is decreasingly knowable since it is increasingly unplanned.” xv Such concepts of the developing world as a space of feral futurities and urban savagery underpinned much of the military discourses surrounding the ‘war on terror’ and even the notion of “terrorism” itself. “The Orientalist notions of racialist worth that helped shape the real and imagined geographies of Western colonialism are particularly important for the ‘war on terror’,” writes Stephen Graham. “Discourses of ‘terrorism’ are crucially important in sustaining such differential values and binaried notions of human worth. Central here is the principle of the absolute externality of the ‘terrorist’ – the inviolable inhumanity and shadowy, monster-like status of those deemed to be actual or dormant ‘terrorists’ or those sympathetic to them. The unbound diffusion of terrorist labelling within the rhetoric of the ‘war on terror’, moreover, works to allow virtually any political opposition to the sovereign power of the US and its allies to be condemned as ‘terrorist’.”xvi Such conflations and anxieties come back to haunt the streets of the developed world in the inescapable pattern of the ‘boomerang effect’. Filtered through the gaze of “homeland security”, the at-home urban environment becomes a low-intensity battlespace, wherein the poor, the immigrant, the person of color, the activist, so on and so forth, all become specters of the terrorist. 24/7 closed-circuit television monitoring, so-called “zero-policy policing”, the militarization of the police themselves, and strategic forms of economic develop honed in smoldering wreckage of Baghdad all converge in the urban zones of the “homeland”. What Foucault once described as the governmental technique of biopower – the ability of the government to provide life and wellness through the combination of applied sciences, statistical analysis and ‘legibility’ of the population – is also the raw materials for this mode of thanatopolitics, the permanent war of the government against the governed. Not to be outdone, Trump’s campaign relied heavily on the ‘dangerous city’ trope, castigating urban environments as war zones and stressing the archetype of ‘good police officer’ fighting for cause of ‘law and order’. In power, he will have at his disposal a vast machine, the goal of which is precisely the ‘taming’ of the city.  
Because of the secrecy of the programs, there has been little reliable data on the UAV campaigns until recently. Even as substantive data begin to emerge, most criticism of the UAV campaigns remains ill-conceived and misplaced. Rather than focusing narrowly on its effectiveness as a means for killing targeted militants, critics should evaluate the UAV program instead in terms of its larger ramifications for U.S. national security and foreign relations, for the countries whose citizens are targeted, for U.S. and international law, and for the global precedents it sets. Drones play but one part in an overall U.S. strategy that is deeply problematic.
This view of policy, the focus on drone warfare, makes it the more necessary, not to appear simplistic, to stay with a close textual analysis that I might make understandable the anatomy of war atrocities. For sensitive feelings, I shall call it instead, “the normalization of the unthinkable.” To continue with background, still mining the Post, let’s go back (September 20, 2011), to the two veteran national-security reporters, Whitlock and Miller, in their article, “U.S. assembling secret drone bases in Africa, Arabian Peninsula, officials say.” Secrecy and the span of drone activities make for an indissoluble bond: “The Obama administration is assembling a constellation of secret drone bases for counterterrorism operations in the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula as part of a newly aggressive campaign to attack al-Qaeda affiliates in Somalia and Yemen, U.S. officials say.” 1.1 Ideological Triumphalism: Wearing Down Opposition to Orthodoxy Besides the drones from Djibouti, “the CIA is building a secret airstrip in the Arabian Peninsula so it can deploy armed drones over Yemen.” What the writers term “the rapid expansion of the undeclared drone wars,” because al-Qaeda, weakened in Pakistan, has spread through its affiliates to Yemen and Somalia, the USA “is known to have used drones to carry out lethal attacks in at least six countries,” which also includes Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya. The Seychelles provides almost comic relief, with negotiations for arming the drones already there being conducted in complete secrecy with its president, who is fearful that the issue is “politically extremely sensitive,” to be treated with the “utmost discreet care.” Again, planning is conscious, well thought out, and consistent with the idea of permanent war: “Overall, officials said, the cluster of bases reflects an effort to have wider geographic coverage, greater leverage with countries in the region and backup facilities if individual airstrips are forced to close.” By “greater leverage,” one assumes that to mean installing bases helps to establish a regional presence for the USA. This translates, among other things, into direct intervention in local affairs to protect the bases, and to facilitate investment and market penetration. America, of course, has learned from British imperial practice, especially in Africa. But instead of placing missionaries in harm’s way, as an excuse for going in, under the guise of protecting them, to establish a presence the drone becomes America’s missionary-pretext to accomplish the same end: presence, penetration, influence, only now, beyond the tricks of the trade, a fulsome geostrategic framework which allows the USA in Africa to extend its reach in every direction, including the Mediterranean and Southern Europe. We see the interrelatedness of policies, trends, actions, at every turn, contradictions to a democratic government and society resolvable at a slightly higher level of abstraction, then establishing a new plateau of uniformity and systemic integration. What is thought of as contradiction is merely the halfway point to the further tightening of a cohesive structuralideological framework. No wonder the difficulty of mounting a critique of the existing order, still less, the work of isolated voices finding belief and acceptance in the populace at large. Soon even those voices will be quieted, not necessarily through repression, for the proto-fascism congealing into final form is more consensual, an ideological triumphalism rooted in the institutional wearing down of resistance to the New Orthodoxy, in which militarism informs capitalism with spirit, ambition, and vitality. 1.2 Continuities: Acceptability of Imperialism/Militarism Three broad areas currently prominent, but promising long-term prospects for continuity both separately and together, come readily to mind, dovetailing with what I see as the doctrine of permanent war. First, a climate of fear has been created, growing out of the legitimate concern about terrorism, yet much-abused in the claims advanced by government as a violation of civil liberties (the program of massive surveillance, enlargement of Executive powers, etc.), and, indirectly, as a variation of mission creep, a further climate of intimidation and acquiescence in relation to all of government policy (use of Espionage Act prosecutions against whistleblowers). Counterterrorism thus becomes the fulcrum for damping down criticism and dissent affecting fundamentals of capitalism, and for engendering consent to massive defense spending and military operations. Second, as a barrier to transparency, and what that implies for the stifling of criticism of public policy, there is the acceptance and practice of the overclassification of government documents, secrecy in the determination of policy choices, with consequences for decision-making on war, intervention, and confrontation, and the general concealment, and shielding from scrutiny, of the full market-basket of repressive practices of the National Security State. Third, as a logical corollary or near-inevitable outcome of the preceding two, there is a shrinkage of the political-ideological spectrum on which permissible policy and action occur and legitimacy is determined and given moral weight. This narrowing of acceptable boundaries for economic, social, and cultural change signifies by a circuitous route an endorsement of market fundamentalism and promotion of the permanent-war mentality (enemies created as circumstances dictate). On military actions heretofore not tolerated there is approval of targeted assassination, once thought on a moral plane with poison gas, now readily passing muster. The Times does not think of overall context, the interconnections to be made between, for example, abrogation of civil liberties at home and the prosecution of an illegal, unwarranted war. More concretely, it fails to recognize the interrelatedness between surveillance, the Espionage Act, denial of habeas corpus rights to detainees, timidity in the face of gun violence and forthright defense of victims, on one hand, and hit lists, opaqueness, secret bases, and an intensification of drone attacks on the other. Obama can do no wrong, even though his is hands- on application for each of these abuses. Then the editorial suggests, “So we have found real reason to find hope”—why? Because “President Obama said it unequivocally on Sunday” (Italics, mine)—said what, other than a vague exhortation to do better? There is ample reason to dwell on the editorial, again for the sake of context, not because one is hardly surprised by the paper’s position, but because it graphically reveals the mindset, its own and that of the Administration. That is, Obama evades responsibility for targeted assassination through envelopment in a framework, cultural, political, ideological, of counterterrorism, an end, at least for now, to end all ends as people become inured to violence and strive only for acceptance and approval, at whatever cost to others. For The Times, there is here an implicit golden mean: a sundering of the psychological-cultural connection between gun violence and drone assassination, in which, by stipulating the injunction, don’t question, and instead, acquiesce, the horror of dead children at home becomes wholly unrelated to the dead children abroad, done by our own hand.
In his hypothesis, Kant had overlooked one scenario: what would happen if one found a means to replace citizen- soldiers by other instruments of warfare? This unexpected option entailed preservation by substitution. It was a solution that had already been attempted, albeit with means still rudimentary, in the late nineteenth century. Hobson, the great defender of British imperialism, explained in 1902 how parliamentary and colonial regimes could, at little cost, rid themselves of “dilemmas of militarism.” Rather than sacrifice national lives, in order to defend the empire all that was necessary was to expand it, or to use native forces to carry out the dirty work of putting down the rebellions that were beginning to threaten imperial authority. By allowing the “mild Hindoo” to straighten things out, the lower classes in Britain would be able to avoid conscription. As a result of delegating in this way to the “lower races” of the empire, the “new imperialism” effected a class compromise within the metropolis—and this presented the added advantage of mostly averting popular antipathy toward the colonial adventures. Hobson warned that all this went hand in hand with a different kind of political danger: “Though reducing the strain of militarism upon the population at home, it enhances the risks of wars, which become more frequent and more barbarous in proportion as they involve to a less degree the lives of Englishmen.”4 In short, as Lord Salisbury had declared a few years earlier, India could certainly serve Great Britain “as an English barrack in Oriental seas from which we may draw any number of troops without paying for them. It is bad for England because it is always bad for us not to have that check upon the temptation to engage in little wars which can only be controlled by the necessity of paying for them.” As soon as the costs of war become an external matter, the very theoretical model that proclaimed the arrival of a democratic pacifism begins to predict the opposite: a democratic militarism.6 When it came to approving or rejecting going to war, citizens who were now immunized against the vital demands of warfare found themselves in more or less the same position as the shallow sovereign whose irresponsibility Kant deplored. As for their leaders, they at last had a free hand. When freed from the constraints attached to the mobilization of human combatants, a sovereign could do precisely what Kant wished to avoid: he could “lead them into war as he would take them on a hunt, and into battles as on a pleasure trip.” 7 Once warfare became ghostly and teleguided, citizens, who no longer risked their lives, would no longer even have a say in it. Whether the risks of war are transferred to natives or to machines, Hobson’s views still hold. The dronization of the armed forces, just like any other procedure that externalizes those risks, alters the conditions of decision making in warfare. Because the threshold of recourse to violence is drastically lowered, violence tends to be seen as the default option for foreign policy.In a totally coherent fashion, we today find modernized versions of a Hobson-type anti-imperialist argument in the works of a whole series of writers who set out to criticize the drones from a liberal point of view, using the tools of the economic decision-making theory. Assuming that the democratic commander in chief is a rational agent, how will the “low cost” of this weapon affect his decisions? The main effect is to introduce a massive bias into his decision. Any agent who can take action with fewer risks to himself or his camp is likely to adopt a riskier pattern of behavior—that is to say, riskier for others. Similarly, the drone is a classic “moral hazard”—a situation in which being 189 able to act without bearing the costs of the consequences relieves agents of responsibility for their decisions.8 More precisely, we are told that drones introduce a threefold reduction in the costs traditionally attached to the use of armed force: a reduction of the political costs associated with the loss of national lives, a reduction of the economic costs associated with armament, and a reduction of the ethical or reputational costs associated with the perceived effects of the violence that is committed.9 That last point is very important. What is the purpose of the discourse about the drone’s necroethics? Its function is to diminish the reputational costs associated with the use of this weapon. Hence its strategic function in the political economy of warfare. The more “ethical” the weapon seems, the more socially acceptable it becomes and the more it becomes possible to use it. But that remark helps us to detect two further contradictions in the above discourse. The first is that of the nullity of the conditional comparison. It is claimed that drone use is justified because it would create fewer collateral victims than other weapons that could have been used in its place. What this argument postulates is that those other means really would have been used—in other words, that the military action would have taken place anyway, and it’s just a question of which weapon is used. But that is precisely what the moral hazard associated with drones renders doubtful. The sophistry becomes clear when one reflects that those other means might never have been employed because of the prohibitively high reputational costs associated with them. Another way of putting that is to say that in a situation of moral hazard, military action is very likely to be deemed “necessary” simply because it is possible, and possible at a lower cost.10 In such cases, it is necessarily false to say that the drone has inflicted less collateral damage: as Jeremy Hammond sums up, the number of civilian victims “of course isn’t lower than it would be if there weren’t drone strikes, in which case precisely zero civilians would be killed in them.”11 The second objection concerns the cumulativeness of lesser evils. As Eyal Weizman has commented, “Even according to the terms of an economy of losses and gains, the concept of the lesser evil risks becoming counterproductive: less brutal measures are also those that may be more easily naturalized, accepted and tolerated—and hence more frequently used, with the result that a greater evil may be reached cumulatively.” To claim to have produced fewer civilian victims in each strike reduces the military reputational cost of each one, making it likely that more strikes will take place and thereby increasing the total number of victims. Another way of putting it is to say that the trees of a surgical strike conceal a forest of tombs. That moral hazard produces yet another perverse effect, this time at a strictly military level. Drones are a very imperfect substitute for troops on the ground and, as we have seen, their exclusive use results in extremely counterproductive effects in terms of counterinsurgency strategy. But if that is the case, why are they used? There may be an economic logic to explain this apparent incoherence. Jonathan Caverley suggests that “low-cost” weapons constitute a strong encouragement to replace military operations by armed forces with highly capitalized military means (in other words, to substitute material for men), even when the effectiveness of that substitution is low (in other words, when the machines do less well than soldiers), for the reduced probability of victory is counterbalanced by the considerable reduction in costs.13But what would be the alternative? Amitai Etzioni, a fervent supporter of drone strikes, asks: “Would we or the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan—or, for that matter, DEMOCRATIC MILITARISM 191 the terrorists—be better off if they were killed in close combat? Say, knifed by Special Forces, blood splashing into their faces?” 14 To which Benjamin Friedman replies, “Actually, yes. The argument is that we make more careful judgments about lethal acts when we anticipate more costs to our troops. Free wars, . . . are more likely to be dumb wars. That doesn’t mean that we should put troops in harm’s way just to have more skin in the game and improve debate. But we should worry about how the absence of discernible consequences at home makes us more likely to casually bomb people. It is not pop sociology but orthodox price theory that tells us that lowering costs increases demand.” 15 Homo economicus goes off to war, and along the way he refutes the drone. But if one changes one’s theoretical spectacles, swapping those of orthodox economics for an analysis in terms of class relations, the phenomenon takes on a different aspect. What is at stake in a tendency to substitute capital for military endeavor is not only an upset in the conditions affecting the political calculations of the democratic sovereign but also, and more fundamentally, an increased social and material autonomization of the state apparatus. The sociologist Beverly Silver explains that in the model that prevailed up until the 1970s, the industrialization of warfare, combined with the importance of numbers and the central place of the working classes and the maintenance of mass conscription, put Western leaders in a position of close social dependency in the exercise of military power.16 The Vietnam crisis made crystal clear all the latent political dangers associated with such a dependent relationship. The American ruling classes came to recognize the full scope of the powerful dynamics of social radicalization that could be engendered by an unpopular imperialistic war. They could also see to what extent the explosive synergies activated by the antiwar movement resonated with all the social movements agitating American society. The first response was to make concessions to the civil rights and labor movements. But this multiform crisis also hastened an extensive strategic reorientation. Transformations already under way in the “modes of war” accelerated.17 The new strategy increased the weight of highly capitalized warfare: there was a definite break from the existing model of conscription and an increasing reliance on private contractors and the weapons for remote warfare. The old model of an army of citizens gave way to a “market army.” 18 The key to this mutation was fundamentally economic, for “by making conscription and casualties less likely, capitalization turns arming and war into exercises of fiscal, rather then social, mobilization.” 19 However, this dynamic of capitalization was not independent of political choices, which themselves were deeply intertwined with the interests of the military-industrial complex. Niklas Schörnig and Alexander Lembcke have shown, in this regard, how the ethical and political discourse of “zero losses” has been very effectively promoted by industrialists producing armaments.20 In 2002, one advertisement for the Boeing X-45A drone proclaimed, “Aircrews won’t have to be put at risk to complete the most dangerous of missions.”21 The two preoccupations—that of the industrialists wanting to sell new weapons, and that of politicians seeking to preserve their electoral capital— converged and interacted, each overdetermining the other. Silver explains how the structural effect of these mutations in modes of war reduced the material dependence of the state apparatus on military work and hence likewise the social dependence on the bodies that made up that workforce: “As such, the growing bargaining power of workers and citizens vis-à-vis their states—an inadvertent by-product of the inter-imperialist and Cold War rivalries of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries—is being reversed, along with many of the economic and social benefits achieved.”22 In fact, contrary to the optimistic claims of “democratic pacifists,” implicating the lives of the population in war decisions was far from an adequate guarantee that military butcheries would be prevented. But even if it failed to rule out catastrophes, its effects were by no means minimal. The state’s dependence on the bodies of the lower classes to wage war was also one of the factors that made it possible for those classes to establish a durable bargaining power. The social state was in part a product of the world wars, the price paid for the cannon fodder, compensation for the blood tax levied by the struggle. And expenses of this type were a factor when the “costs” of weaponry were being calculated.