The United States has announced a $250m military aid package for war-torn Ukraine to strengthen the country's naval and land capabilities. The Pentagon said on Tuesday that the US would also provide Ukraine with naval training, as well as sniper rifles, rocket-propelled grenade launchers, radars and night vision equipment. "The United States remains committed to helping Ukraine ... to strengthen democratic civilian control of the military, promote command and control reforms, enhance transparency and accountability in acquisition and budgeting, and advance defence industry reforms," Lieutenant Colonel Carla M Gleason, a Pentagon spokesman, said in a statement. "These reforms will bolster Ukraine's ability to defend its territorial integrity in support of a secure, prosperous, democratic and free Ukraine," Gleason added. According to the statement, the amount is part of a series of Pentagon payments totalling $1.5bn to the country since 2014, when Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula and Moscow-backed separatists seized parts of eastern Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk regions. About 13,000 people have been killed since the conflict erupted. Ukraine and its Western allies accuse Russia of funnelling troops and arms to the pro-Moscow rebels across the border. Moscow denies the allegations.
WASHINGTON: As tensions rise between Russia and Ukraine on the Black Sea, the US is upgrading several Ukrainian naval bases to give American and NATO warships the ability to dock just miles from Russia-controlled Crimea. Centered at the Ochakiv Naval Base and the military facility at Mykolaiv — 40 miles east of Odessa and less than 100 northwest of Crimea — the American-funded effort includes reinforcing and upgrading existing piers and adding a new floating dock, security fencing around the bases, ship repair facilities, and a pair of brand-new Maritime Operations Centers from which Ukrainian and NATO forces can direct exercises and coordinate activities. The upgrades come after last November’s incident where Russian warships fired on and seized three Ukrainian navy vessels in the Kerch Strait between Russia and Ukraine. Russia is still holding the crews. Google Maps graphic The US is building up Ukraine’s bases at Ocon the Black Sea coast, west of Russian-occupied Crimea. The new American effort in Ukraine will likely rankle Moscow. Since the Cold War, “the Russian military command has always held the fear that one day Ukraine would leave Russia and eventually there would be a NATO naval base on Moscow’s doorstep,” said Michael Kofman, an expert on the Russian military at CNA in Washington. “That fear led to Russia seizing and annexing Crimea, from which they could contest practically the entire Black Sea.” While Ukraine isn’t a NATO member, it does receive training from NATO forces and is currently hosting the annual Sea Breeze exercise that includes US and allied warships and several hundred Marines. From RAYTHEON The exercise and the US support comes in direct response to Russia’s military buildup in Crimea. Since taking it by force in 2014, Moscow has sent some of its most advanced military kit to the peninsula, including five S-400 anti-aircraft battalions, ten warships, six Kilo-class submarines, and new fighter aircraft, thereby allowing Moscow to project power across the Black Sea. Romania, which sits just 150 miles across the water from Crimea, is buying the Patriot air defense system from the US, and Romanian and American forces recently held a series of air defense drills in the Black Sea that simulated shooting down drones. Russia’s moves haven’t gone unnoticed in the rest of Europe. While visiting Washington earlier this year, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance was discussing “what more we can do to enhance our security in the Black Sea region,” adding the allies had already agreed on “a package of measures to improve our situational awareness, and to step up our support for both Georgia and Ukraine.” The focus will be on training of maritime forces and coast guards, along with increased port visits and exercises. A majority of the effort is taking place at the Ochakiv, which has seen a series of visits from US Navy construction teams over the past few years. The work at Ochakiv won’t be wrapped up until August, Lt. Spencer Bull, operations officer for Underwater Construction Team 1 currently in Ukraine assessing the piers, told me. “The intent is to be able to use it for US and allied exercises,” he said, adding that his team of divers will work to reinforce existing piers, map out the seafloor to make sure bigger ships can dock there, and discuss where to place the planned floating dock.
The U.S. will continue cooperating with Ukraine to improve its defence capacity, as Special Representative to Ukraine said, Ukraine’s Embassy to the U.S. reports on Facebook. Volker noted that the U.S. was ready to work with Ukraine to provide it with defence lethal equipment. “Congress adopted international military funding which provides support for Ukraine in a form of different types of weapons including anti-tank and counter-sniper systems. We will continue consulting with Ukraine concerning its defence needs. Besides we are ready to military sales abroad, so Ukraine can purchase all military equipment from the U.S., Volker said at the briefing. ” According to him, Ukraine needs to enhance its defence capacity as the country comes under attacks daily so there is a need to prevent further occupation of the territories. The U.S. defence budget provides $100 million for Ukraine for lethal equipment. In particular, the U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services approved the draft law “On the U.S. budget for 2020 for the needs of national security”, which authorized allocations to Pentagon for Ukraine in the amount of $300 million, which is by $50 million more. $100 million out of that sum is to be spent for lethal weaponry.
THE TRUMP administration will deploy $250 million worth of military aid and equipment – some of it lethal – to Ukraine's armed forces as it seeks to deter Russian aggression amid a recent spike in hostile acts, the Defense Department confirmed Tuesday. The new equipment the U.S. will provide includes sniper rifles for Ukraine's special operations forces, as well as grenade launchers, counter-artillery radars and equipment to detect and protect against electronic warfare. The Obama administration and initially President Donald Trump balked at sending lethal weapons to Ukraine reportedly for fear of provoking Moscow, despite pressure from Congress. Trump authorized sending Javelin anti-tank missiles in 2017. The U.S. will also increase its support to the Ukrainian navy and maritime troops, following last year's crisis at the Kerch Strait resulting in Russia's capturing 24 Ukrainian seamen, who remain in detention under the auspices of criminal proceedings. The new aid, which Congress authorized and has pushed the Trump administration to disperse, brings the total U.S. support to Ukraine to $1.5 billion since it began in 2014, when Russia annexed the Crimea peninsula and began its ongoing support for separatist militias in Ukraine's eastern region, known as the Donbas. Ukrainian soldiers continue to die during isolated skirmishes and intermittent sniper and artillery fire in the simmering conflict. Commander of the rail blockade Ivan (did not want to give his last name), nom de guerre Silver, stands near railroad tracks at a blockade camp in Kryvyi Torets railway station in the village of Shcherbynivka, Donetsk region, Ukraine on March 12, 2017. The blockaders have cut off some of the rail traffic in order to reduce coal trade with non-government controlled territories in eastern Ukraine. The blockade was dismantled by authorities the next day. It also represents a major coup for supporters of the U.S. effort to deter Russia in Ukraine following the election of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy earlier this year. The former comedian and yet-untested leader's policies toward Russia remain unclear, despite traveling to NATO headquarters for his first official trip as the country's leader, and subsequently to Germany. He was in Paris on Monday, where he called for continued "pressure" on Moscow. Before retiring as the top officer for U.S. operations in Europe, Army Gen. Curtis Scaparrotti previewed the potential lethal aid to Congress in March, citing concerns about Russia. "I'm not comfortable yet with the deterrent posture we have in Europe," the chief of U.S. Europe Command and top officer for NATO at the time told the Senate Armed Services Committee. Scaparrotti said any subsequent decision had "to go through the policy deliberations." Scaparrotti drew particular attention to Russia's naval aggression, months after it attempted to block off Ukrainian access to key shipping ports in the Black Sea, accessible through the Kerch Strait. Analysts at the time feared the dispute would reignite what had become a simmering four-year-old conflict, largely restricted to ground-based fighting in the Donbas. The shipment announced Tuesday also represents a major win for those who feared Trump would walk back U.S. support for allies who face Russian aggression. It was unclear at the beginning of his administration whether he would continue support for an initiative Obama began in 2014 known as the European Reassurance Initiative, or European Deterrence Initiative, which included providing non-lethal aid and training to Ukraine, and deploying NATO troops to other countries along Russia's border, including the Baltic states and Poland.
The Defense Department said Tuesday it will send $250 million more in military equipment to war-torn Ukraine. The announcement – which brings the U.S. security assistance up to $1.5 billion – came just hours before members of Congress convened to assess how to continue supporting Ukraine in its fight for sovereignty from its powerhouse neighbor Russia. Ukraine represents ground zero in the U.S.-Russia conflict, Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin said in Tuesday’s Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing. Senators agreed on continued need for U.S. support of Ukraine following the election of President Volodymyr Zelensky in May. Zelensky swept into office with 73 percent of the vote while promising a new surge of diplomatic efforts to bring Ukraine into the European Union. A focus on reviving ceasefire talks between the newly elected president and Russian President Vladimir Putin underscored the senators’ discussion Tuesday with Ambassador Kurt Volker, who represents the State Department on Ukraine negotiations. In 2015, the two nations brokered the Minsk agreement intended to bring an immediate ceasefire between the Ukrainian military and Russia-backed separatist militias. But the negotiations failed to stall bloody engagements on Europe’s doorstep, with both sides accusing the other of violating the terms. Volker said the agreement lays out all the necessary solutions but Russia must now act.   “What’s lacking is the political will for Russia to actually implement it,” Volker said. “All of these things add up to make it more and more clear to Russia that their efforts to re-subordinate Ukraine to its sphere are not going to work.” He also stressed the importance of a swift diplomatic action to end the violence that has plagued the Ukrainian people for nearly five years.
The Department of Defense plans to send $250 million in military equipment to Ukraine to assist in building up the country's military capabilities as it continues to counter Russian-backed forces in its eastern provinces. The aid package will include sniper rifles, grenade launchers, and counter-artillery radars for the Ukrainian Navy, special operations forces, and land troops. Electronic warfare detection equipment, night vision technology, and military medical equipment will also be included. This additional equipment brings total U.S. security assistance to Ukraine to $1.5 billion since 2014, according to the Pentagon. "I think the provision of security assistance to Ukraine is vitally important. I think it has had an impact both psychologically as well as militarily on the professionalization and the capacity of the Ukrainian forces," Kurt Volker, the U.S. special representative for Ukraine, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee at a Tuesday hearing. "I think it’s also important that Ukraine reciprocate with foreign military purchases from us as well, and I know that they intend to do so." The assistance comes at a pivotal moment for Ukraine's newly minted president, Volodymyr Zelensky, a popular comedian who won a landslide victory in April. Zelensky has made ending the Russian-backed insurrection in Ukraine's eastern Donbas region his top political priority. The conflict remains in an uneasy stalemate following international attempts to broker a ceasefire. Tensions spiked in November when Russian forces captured and detained 24 sailors following an attack on three Ukrainian vessels. "We must become Icelanders in football, Israelis in defending our native land, Japanese in technology," Zelensky said during his swearing-in speech in May. "Our first task is to achieve a ceasefire in Donbas." Volker told senators the United States should continue to add maritime and air defense capabilities to the Ukrainian arsenal as Russia continues to pose a threat in the Black Sea. "I think it’s important that NATO stand up to make clear that all of us have an interest in the freedom of navigation, the open access, the economic development of the region, and the security of the region," he said. The U.S. created the European Deterrence Initiative in 2014 in response to Russia's annexation of Ukraine's Crimea territory. Congress authorized the sale of lethal aid to Ukraine that year, but the Obama administration did not sign off on the provision due to concerns that offensive weapons could escalate tensions. U.S. support was limited to non-lethal aid until President Trump reversed the policy in 2017, though his administration proposed a 10% cut to the fund in this year's budget proposal. Rick Berger, a former Senate Budget Committee staffer who studies defense budgets for the American Enterprise Institute, told the Washington Examiner there is broad bipartisan support for continuing aid to Ukraine. He expects Congress will increase Ukrainian military support, saying there is minimal concern regarding escalation on Capitol Hill. "These aid packages are very well tailored to the things that, by and large, the Ukrainian military actually needs," Berger said. "Congress cares about Ukraine in a bipartisan fashion, and I wouldn't be surprised if [aid] goes up again in this year's" National Defense Authorization Act. The fate of next year's defense budget remains unclear, however, as congressional leaders wrangle over the federal budget as a whole
President Trump often appears delusional in his personal interactions with President Vladimir Putin of Russia. But the opposite is true of Trump's Russia policy. Indeed, Trump is far tougher on Putin than President Barack Obama ever was. We saw this again on Tuesday in the form of $250 in military support to the Ukrainian military and security services. The new supplies bring the total provision of U.S. military support to Ukraine to $1.5 billion since 2014. And they include elements clearly designed to deter and defeat Russian aggression. These include "sniper rifles, rocket-propelled grenade launchers, and counter-artillery radars" and "electronic warfare detection." Those systems will help Ukraine's military to challenge Russian combat forces in their keystone competencies. The electronic warfare disruption issue is especially important. The $250 million also notably entails increased "support for Ukraine's Navy and Naval infantry." That's a countermeasure to escalating Russian aggression against Ukraine's maritime sovereignty. It also offers the Pentagon an indirectly lethal means of rebuking Russia's escalating harassment of the U.S. Navy.
Over the five years of grinding war that has pitted Ukrainian forces against Russia-backed fighters, the United States has provided hundreds of millions of dollars in military gear: night-vision goggles, flak jackets, vehicles, counter-battery radars, among other things. Last year, after years of internal debate that preceded his administration, President Donald Trump began supplying Ukraine with sophisticated anti-tank missiles known as Javelins -- a move that some feared would antagonize Moscow. Now, U.S. lawmakers are moving to up the ante again, with legislation that would authorize supplying Kyiv with surface-to-air missiles. The effort comes in an amendment being attached to legislation providing funding for the Defense Department; the amendment removes existing language prohibiting the sale of such missiles, known as man-portable air-defense systems, or MANPADS. Sponsored by the two top lawmakers on the House Foreign Affairs Committee -- Democrat Eliot Engel and Republican Michael McCaul -- the measure, which is expected to pass easily, does not mean that the weapons will be supplied right away. Any final decision would have to go through multiple approval processes at various U.S. agencies, including the U.S. Defense Department. Moreover, targets for Ukrainian surface-to-air missiles are limited for now: Russia-backed separatists don’t have fighter jets, and Russia sending its own aircraft over Ukraine would undermine its assertions that it is not involved in the conflict. Still, the move sends a clear message to the Kremlin of where Congress stands regarding the war in Ukraine. And, according to Steven Pifer, a former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, it's a logical next step after the U.S. decision to supply Javelins to the Ukrainian armed forces. "I don't see this as generating more problems than the arrival of the Javelins did," Pifer, now a research fellow at Stanford University's Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies, told RFE/RL. "We're not talking about providing the Ukrainians with F-35 fighters or M-1 tanks." The Defense Department did not immediately respond to a query seeking comment on the possibility of supplying the missiles. One U.S. diplomat who has worked on Ukraine-related issues downplayed the significance of the amendment, telling RFE/RL on the condition of anonymity in order to speak freely that it simply removed "an arbitrary restriction that is not in place for most countries." The move comes as part of a broader effort in Congress to increase military support for Ukraine. Two separate pieces of legislation making their way through the House and the Senate call for authorizing up to $300 million in annual military support for Ukraine, an increase from past years. And the House legislation calls for the first time for supplying anti-ship missiles and coastal-defense weaponry to Ukraine in response to an incident in November 2018, when Russian Coast Guard ships seized three Ukrainian boats and 24 sailors in the Kerch Strait near the Crimean Peninsula. Though the overall death toll has surpassed 13,000, fighting around Ukraine's Donbas region has ebbed and flowed in intensity since 2014, when the conflict with Russia first erupted. In recent weeks, there's been a sharp uptick in artillery shelling and gunfire, with Ukraine's military reporting that at least six soldiers were killed last week. It's unclear how Russia would respond if Washington did in fact move forward to supply the surface-to-air missiles. And it's unclear how that would affect stalled peace negotiations, including the so-called Minsk Trilateral Contact Group meetings and the Normandy Format talks. Ukraine's newly elected president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has called for restarting both efforts; last week, the Trilateral Group -- comprised of officials from Russia, Ukraine, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe -- met for the first time in weeks. But Konstantin Kosachyov, a member of Russia's upper house of parliament and a Kremlin ally, criticized the overall increase in U.S. military funding for Ukraine. "In this way Washington fuels Ukraine's internal conflict. Such foreign support may create a dangerous delusion in Kiev that a solution can be achieved by military means," Kosachyov said in a post to his Facebook page on June 11. "Each million dollars of military support to Kiev spells more casualties and months and even years of war against one’s own people, for which the United States will bear its share of responsibility." The MANPADS would have no immediate battlefield use, Pifer noted, since Russian military aircraft have not been used in the conflict. Drones, however, are widely used by both sides in the conflict. While Moscow reacted angrily when Washington agreed to supply the Javelins to Ukraine, there have been few remarks by Russian officials on the subject since the 210 missiles and 37 launchers arrived in April 2018. Ukraine has showcased the Javelins in publicized drills but its armed forces have not used them in combat against Russia-backed forces in eastern battlefields. The special U.S. envoy for Ukraine, Kurt Volker, has said that the Javelins are being stored in a secure facility far from the front line. Ukrainian and U.S. sources with knowledge of the storage locations have told RFE/RL that the missiles and launchers have been separated into smaller groups and are held in strategic locations around the country, possibly in underground bunkers, where they can be moved quickly to areas that border Russia or the eastern front line. In March, the top U.S. military commander for Europe told the Senate Armed Services Committee that even if the Javelins hadn't been deployed, their presence had been registered by Russia-backed forces. "They take that into consideration in the deployment of their forces and where they put them," General Curtis Scaparrotti told the committee. Since 2014, Ukraine has received more than $3 billion in total support, including security and nonsecurity assistance, from the United States.
As Ukraine marked the fifth anniversary of the start of its armed conflict with Russian-backed separatists, Kiev said there were multiple violations of its cease-fire agreement in the eastern part of the country known as the Donbas. On January 9, Russian proxy forces in eastern Ukraine violated the cease-fire twice, Ukraine's Joint Forces Operation noted. "The strongholds of our troops were fired upon from grenade launchers of various types, large-caliber machine guns, and small arms near the village of Novomykhailivka on the Donetsk line and outside Lebedynske in the Mariupol direction," a statement from the Joint Forces Operation reads. Around 10,000 people are estimated to have been killed in the fighting between Ukraine and Russian-backed forces over the past five years since the fighting broke out. The conflict began after a pro-Western social movement ousted a pro-Russian president who subsequently fled the country. Russia has denied that it is backing the separatists, but both the U.S. and the European Union have sanctioned Russia over its interference in eastern Ukraine, citing evidence of Moscow's involvement. Ukraine's prosecutor general's office also issued a report on Thursday claiming that it had discovered documents in eastern Ukraine's Luhansk region that prove Russia is financing the separatists there. "The evidence obtained will be used in cases against the Russian Federation in international courts. The PGO continues active work in the relevant direction," a spokesman said in a statement. Meanwhile, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is monitoring the conflict and whether both sides are abiding by the rules of the Mink II peace agreement, which was signed in 2015. The agreement commits both Ukraine and Russia to "immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and its strict implementation as of 15 February 2015, 12am local time." Both sides were also required to withdraw heavy weapons from a designated security zone. Experts, however, have cast doubt on the efficacy of the agreement. "The Minsk agreement signed in February 2015, also known as Minsk II, is destined to fail because it was designed to fail," Max Bader, lecturer on Russia and Eurasia at the University of Leiden, wrote for Carnegie Europe last year. "The separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine and their Russian backers never intended to implement points 4 and 9 of the agreement. Point 4 stipulates that new local elections in the separatist territories must be held under Ukrainian legislation. Point 9 provides for the full restoration of Ukrainian state control over the country's borders. Two years after Minsk II was signed, there is not the slightest indication that Moscow and the separatists intend to fulfill these elements of the accord."
Over the past day, the Ukrainian armed forces violated the armistice regime in the LPR two times, firing almost 100 rounds of ammunition into the Republic, the press service of the People’s Militia reports. “During the day, the Ukrainian security forces broke the ceasefire 2 times by using the weapons of the BMP-1, LNG, AGS, large-caliber and small arms,” the report said. According to the Defense Ministry, the areas of the settlement were subjected to shelling. Lozovoe and Logvinovo. In total, almost 100 munitions were fired throughout the territory of the LPR.
As peace talks got under way on June 5 in Minsk, Belarus, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s representatives sat at the negotiating table for the first time. Meanwhile, Russia’s war against his country — now in its sixth year at a cost of 13,000 lives — has been taking its toll. The same day as the talk, the army reported that three Ukrainian soldiers were killed on the front line. On June 6, another was killed — a grim reminder that all peace talks have failed. Nevertheless, Ukraine’s new chief negotiator in Minsk, former President Leonid Kuchma, left the meeting with optimism. He suggested that the peace process has a modest chance of breaking free of years of deadlock. “For the first time the meetings of the working groups were held in a constructive way,” Kuchma told the journalists. “All sides wanted to find a solution.” This is not, however, the first time Kuchma is involved in the Minsk peace talks. He was appointed as the representative of Ukraine at the Trilateral Contact Group under Poroshenko in September 2015 and stepped down in October 2018. The restarted talks give renewed hope for a cease-fire to millions living in the embattled Donbas region of eastern Ukraine. They will also fuel hopes for a prisoner exchange. Currently, about 200 Ukrainians are imprisoned in Russia and Russian-occupied Crimea and Donbas. With other options few and far between, hope dies last. Failed agreements Ukraine and Russia signed their first peace agreement in Minsk in September 2014. The deal was updated in February 2015, following the disastrous battles for Ilovaisk and Debaltseve, where Russia openly sent regular troops to crush Ukraine’s army. Many believe these agreements, signed at gunpoint, are unfavorable to Ukraine. Not even the first paragraph — the call for a cease-fire — has been honored by Russia. Nonetheless, nobody has a better idea for bringing peace. The extensive frontline snaking through Ukraine’s Donbas region has not seen any significant changes since 2015. But thousands have still been killed in sporadic episodes of fighting over the past four years. Kuchma said the sides have agreed to start a new cease-fire on June 10, in Stanytsia Luhanska, a government-controlled town with the region’s crossing point into the Russian-controlled part of Luhansk Oblast. But Ukrainians can only cross the frontline over a heavily damaged bridge, which Zelenskiy recently promised would be rebuilt by the Ukrainian side. Balazs Jarabik, an associate fellow at the Central European Policy Institute, said Zelenskiy has demonstrated stronger will to bring the peace talks out of deadlock than his ex-President Petro Poroshenko, who tended to speak more about sanctions against Russia than reaching peace. “The most important thing in returning to Minsk is political will,” he said. Prisoner exchange Olena Duvanova from the Kharkiv Oblast city of Izium, some 580 kilometers southeast of Kyiv, is among those who have great hopes for the Minsk talks. Her husband Kim Duvanov was captured along with seven other soldiers by Russian proxies on May 22 and became one of the most recent hostages in Russia’s war. A military truck that Duvanov was traveling in crossed the frontline and drove into a Russian-controlled part of Donetsk Oblast near the town of Novotroitske, some 30 kilometers southwest of the Russian-occupied city of Donetsk. Now Duvanov is held in Donetsk and awaiting a prisoner swap, a process that has been stalled since late 2017. On June 6, Duvanova spoke to representatives of the Security Service of Ukraine, or SBU, who assured her that her husband is alive and receiving food and medical care. “Now we are waiting for the next meeting in Minsk on June 19 when they will discuss an ‘all-for-all’ prisoner exchange,” Duvanova told the Kyiv Post. More than 200 Ukrainians like Duvanov are currently held in such prisons. Roughly the same number of Russian nationals and Russian-backed fighters remain in Ukrainian prisons, human rights activists estimate. But the last big prisoner exchange took place in December 2017, when 74 Ukrainians were released from prisons in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts in exchange for 233 pro-Kremlin individuals held on Ukrainian government-controlled territory. On June 5, Kuchma said that there is some hope for another prisoner exchange, which was also part of the Minsk agreements. Valeria Lutkovska, a former Ukrainian human rights ombudswoman who was recently appointed by Zelenskiy as a humanitarian representative to the Minsk group, wrote on Facebook that “we’ve got a little hope for a positive step forward.” Activists and relatives of Ukrainians held in Russian jails hold their portraits and names and urge for their release during the rally in Kyiv, on June 1, 2019. (Volodymyr Petrov) Ending trade blockade After the latest Minsk talks, Kuchma also said that Ukraine might lift the blockade on trade with Russian-occupied parts of Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts, which was imposed in 2017 under pressure from activists and volunteers who fought for the Ukrainian side in Donbas. This idea sparked concerns in Kyiv. Since 2017, most Ukrainian government institutions and private companies working in Russian-controlled parts of Donbas have been seized by Russian proxies who changed their ownership. Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko warned that resuming trade with these companies is now illegal and may be prosecuted as “financing terrorism.” Poroshenko claimed this move would “legitimize the occupation” of parts of the Donbas “through the mechanisms of recognizing the tax regime and ownership.” “A peace on the terms of capitulation is not a peace, it’s capitulation,” he said during a briefing on June 6. Volodymyr Fesenko, head of the Penta political think tank, said both Lutsenko and Poroshenko are not being genuine, because, when the blockade was implemented in 2017, they did not support it. “Until February 2017, this trade flourished with the blessing of Petro (Poroshenko),” he said. Nevertheless, Fesenko believes it will now be difficult to relaunch trade cooperation. Jarabik said that lifting the economic blockade could help Ukraine solve the problem of its coal supply after Russia banned the export of crude oil, oil products, and coal to Ukraine starting on June 1. “Now Ukraine needs coal to avoid an energy crisis in winter,” he said. Yevhen Mahda, head of the Kyiv-based Institute of World Policy, said he sees no benefit from lifting the economic blockade, but the move would be useful for Zelenskiy. “Zelenskiy needs some success stories,” he said. “That’s why he is taking this reverent step toward voters from Donbas,” who will benefit from the trade. However, this would be seen by Russia as a concession and could help resume the prisoner exchange program, Mahda said. This map shows the Russian-occupied part of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, an area of more than 15,000 square kilometers. The frontline between government-controlled and Russian-controlled parts of Donbas stretches for 450 kilometers and remains without major changes since February 2015.(Source: Ministry of Defense) What Russia wants Kuchma also claimed that, at the next meeting in Minsk on June 19, all sides would discuss the terms of a full cease-fire. That could include a ban on the shelling of schools and kindergartens, as well as a ban on opening fire in response when soldiers are being attacked from civilian areas. But a key question remains: Will Russia and its proxies in the Donbas abide by it? Fesenko said Russian-proxy forces started an escalation during Zelenskiy’s first foreign visit to Brussels, where he reaffirmed Ukraine’s path toward Europe. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said on June 6 that he doesn’t understand Zelenskiy’s policy toward Russia and the Minsk process, claiming that “very vague signals” are coming from Kyiv. Zelenskiy’s ideas to hold referendums on NATO membership and relations with Russia, have sparked significant criticism in Ukraine. But Zelenskiy has also withdrawn Viktor Medvedchuk from the Minsk talks. A pro-Russian politician and friend of Russian President Vladimir Putin, Medvedchuk was previously the only person in Ukraine allowed to make direct flights between Kyiv and Moscow. Now, he has lost the privilege he enjoyed under Poroshenko. According to Mahda, while tactics in the Minsk talks will likely be different under Zelenskiy, Ukraine’s government will not agree to start direct talks with Russian proxy leaders in the Donbas, something Russia has demanded for years. But many see little chance for a real breakthrough in the Minsk process, believing that the war will continue as long as Putin wants it to continue. In the short run, the best that can be expected from Minsk is a long-term ceasefire, Jarabik believes. “What they can do is to freeze the conflict, because (now) the conflict isn’t frozen,” he said.
Will Zelensky Wittingly or Unwittingly Bring the US Into War? Should the comedian win, one of two things will happen. His inexperience, coupled with gullibility, could play into Putin’s hands, and the Russian leader will retake the Ukraine for his own. Refugees from such a terrible event would flood Eastern European countries, already strained by those who fled wars in the Middle East and North Africa. While some liberals and conservatives dismiss the need to get involved, others in NATO see Ukraine as essential to opposing Putin’s expansionist policies. An emboldened Putin, flush with his success, would certainly move against Moldova in the region, or the Baltics, rebuilding the old Soviet Union. Some NATO forces would act as a “coalition of the willing” against Russia, informally to prevent Putin allies from vetoing the project. There are other ways this could go badly. A new Democratic president, if one is elected, might seek to adopt a more pro-human rights policy that would run afoul of Putin. Regardless of how it starts, the plot would begin to resemble some fantastic Tom Clancy novel of shifted loyalties and uncertain coalitions. Democracies are a little more predictable, but nobody knows how a number of authoritarian leaders from Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to Polish, Hungarian and other East European heads of state would react. Are they more jealous of their sovereignty than willing to bend the knee to Putin? An unstable Ukrainian ruler doesn’t seem like the best solution to this crisis. Hopefully if Poroshenko is reelected, stability can return, and the country can continue to experience its slow but steady growth in political and economic reforms. A diplomatic solution with the Russian revolutionary regions would not be out of the question, as the situation resembles a stalemate. If not, expect a round of “bad humor” to emerge from East Europe after the 2019 Ukrainian election, as the country returns to the days where Yanukovych-like rulers reigned.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky has discussed the country's reforms and counteraction to Russia's aggression with representatives of the United States who arrived in Kyiv to take part in the official ceremony of Zelensky's inauguration. "The United States is a powerful and serious partner for Ukraine, first of all, in overcoming Russia's aggression. We will not be able to overcome the Russian aggression in Donbas and Crimea alone. Therefore, we need your help. I would like to urge you that the United States keeps increasing sanctions against the Russian Federation," the presidential press service quoted Zelensky as saying on May 20. The president thanked the American side for its leadership in restoring Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and for the assistance in security and promotion of the internal reforms. Zelensky added that he was ready to implement transparent, open and democratic reforms in Ukraine. "We have a very good example of your country. Reforming Ukraine as a whole, in all areas, will be held simultaneously rather than after the ceasefire in Donbas. Because we need it. We are willing to become a European country in terms of values and transparency," he said. Zelensky also thanked U.S. President Donald Trump for his greetings and expressed the hope of meeting with him soon. The head of state also emphasized the importance of further integrated development of the Ukrainian-American strategic partnership, primarily through the implementation of mutually beneficial energy cooperation programs and deepening of cooperation in the field of security. The American side was presented by a delegation headed by U.S. Secretary of Energy Rick Perry, U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker, and U.S. Senator Ron Johnson As UNIAN reported earlier, Zelensky on May 20 sworn the oath of allegiance to the people of Ukraine and officially became president.
KIEV, Ukraine—Like a happy teen—and much to the surprise of his bodyguards—newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymir Zelensky jumped into a fountain last weekend as his tour of war-torn Ukraine’s eastern region promised to become historical, if not hysterical. In the city of Mariupol, not far from the front lines, a flock of local kids followed the president in his soaking wet suit as he sprinted among jets of water. You don’t see many top officials in post-Soviet countries horsing around with kids like this. Actually, you wouldn’t have seen any before Zelensky, the former TV comedian who played an accidental president only to be elected for real in May, and by a landslide. Witnesses said the scene was like a “medicine” for people in the strategic port city, which has buried hundreds of civilians and soldiers in the past five years of war. Just a few weeks ago the 41-year-old Zelensky won his office by declaring he was a tough leader coming to break the old molds in Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy, and since the day of his inauguration the list of radical decisions has been growing. Zelensky dissolved the parliament and sent a clear message to Moscow about its incursions in the east of the country since 2014: both “Donbass and Crimea are Ukraine,” he declared unequivocally, even though Russian President Vladimir Putin has annexed Crimea. Zelensky quickly fired Ukraine’s top officials, appointing instead young, reliably loyal friends of his to the key positions. His critics said that it was a new style of cronyism, doubting that his new people with little or no experience in public office could handle important decisions, expose billion-dollar corruption, and investigate dozens of murders committed during the Ukrainian revolution of 2014, as well as other major crimes. But Zelensky continued to appoint people he could trust. Zelensky has defined two wars in Ukraine, “the war with Russia and the war with corruption.” During his meetings in France and Germany this week, Zelensky focused on ending the war in Donbass and bringing dozens of Ukrainian prisoners back home. If that did not work, he called to expand the mechanism of sanctions against Russia. “The strategic course of Ukraine to achieve full-fledged membership in the E.U. and NATO, which is secured in the constitution of Ukraine, remains unchanged,” he said at a meeting with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg earlier this month. The war on corruption promises to be tough and long. Last month in a Delaware court Ukraine’s Privat Bank filed a suit against Zelensky’s longtime business partner, Ihor Kolomoisky, for “hundreds of millions of dollars,” accusing the oligarch of “unjust enrichment” in “a series of brazen fraudulent schemes.” Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenskaya, admitted to The Daily Beast that her husband was upset about the accusations against his former business partner, the patron of the television network where he made his fame. But she insisted that President Zelensky was independent from the oligarch. “Volodymyr is never going to be anybody’s puppet,” she said. In spite of recommendations from Washington’s special envoy for Ukraine, Kurt Walker, Zelensky appointed his 42-year-old aide on legal issues, Andrei Bogdan, to be head of the presidential administration. He made his childhood friend, Ivan Bakanov, the acting head of the SBU, the Security Service of Ukraine. It is still a question when, if ever, Zelensky is going to negotiate peace with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Moscow has made it clear that it will not accept Ukraine integrating fully with the E.U. and NATO, and for now Moscow is accusing Ukraine of “aggression.”
Newly-inaugurated Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky set the standard when he called for “a strong, powerful, free Ukraine, which is not the younger sister of Russia, which is not a corrupt partner of Europe, but our independent Ukraine.” This pledge and a unique background led Mr. Zelensky to an election victory over then-incumbent President Petro Poroshenko. Mr. Zelensky has dire situations to resolve. Crimea has already been lost to the aggression of Russian President Vladimir Putin. Parts of the country are still in a civil war, also testifying to the ambitions of Mr. Putin. Mr. Zelensky has correctly assessed the Crimean situation in publicly stating the peninsula will not be returned to Ukraine until there is a change in Russian leadership. Concerning the civil war, he has acknowledged the need to deal directly with the Moscow instigators and not their puppets on the Ukrainian battlefields. The out-of-control corruption of all three branches of government has long since created a lack of faith by foreign investors and massive migration of productive citizens out of Ukraine. Mr. Zelensky is one of the intellectuals that has not left his country in what is being referred to as the brain drain. He is  staying for the fight. But the problem is far more severe than loss of intellectuals, as this migration includes hard-working Ukrainian citizens who want to raise their families in a stable environment. The United States needs to help Ukraine get back on its feet through oversight of the anti-corruption organizations that were created. The National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine (NABU), which was supposed to fight corruption, was co-opted by Mr. Poroshenko to attack his political enemies. To stop an issue like this arising we cannot trust the government to regulate itself. Instead, there needs to be foreign oversight to ensure something like this does not happen again. NABU, a Western-created agency, was considered trustworthy and above suspicion, but it became involved in the biggest scandal of the Poroshenko presidency. In 2016 it removed several companies which had connections to Ukrainian officials from a list of suspicious entities involved in military procurement. According to investigations by Ukrainian journalists, Ihor Hladkovskiy, the son of the deputy secretary of the National Security and Defense Council, Oleh Hladkovskiy, was a direct participant in “schemes in the millions” that stole money from Ukraine’s defense industry complex and illegally profited from the war. They organized contraband imports of Russian parts for Ukrainian military hardware, and then sold them at highly inflated prices to the armed forces. In the words of opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko, the army was robbed by Mr. Poroshenko. Volunteer battalions fighting on the frontline against the separatists were forced to buy equipment — including Kalashnikovs and armored personnel carriers — from shadowy private firms like Techimpex, which had evident connections to Ukrainian officials. The Poroshenko government was profiteering through inflating the price of arms. Without foreign oversight, corruption cannot be stopped as the rich and powerful in Ukraine will always put their interests ahead of the nation’s. Mr. Zelensky is looking to bring Ukraine into the European Union and NATO. This will not be possible until the nation’s many internal problems are fixed. He is on the right track, but he needs help. The citizens are overwhelmingly behind him; corruption fighter and former governor of Odessa, Mikheil Saakashvili, is returning to Ukraine to assist Mr. Zelensky. Also returning is Oleksandr Onyshchenko, a current and hopefully future member of the Ukrainian Parliament, whistleblower, and author of the book “Peter the Fifth,” which is a personal account of the corrupt dealings within the Poroshenko administration. A prominent businessman in Ukraine, Oleksandr Onyshchenko was forced to leave Ukraine after accusing President Petro Poroshenko of pervasive corruption and making his mark as a staunch opposition supporter. Charges and arrest warrants were issued as a result of Mr. Onyshchenko revealing audiotapes that exposed high level corruption in Mr. Poroshenko’s inner circle. NABU agents demanded a bribe in the form of a stake in his company worth $150 million in return for dropping the charges. Mr. Onyshchenko’s recent comment “We cannot fail this time” is on target. This may be Ukraine’s last chance to get it right. For years the Poroshenko administration looted Ukraine of its financial resources. On the low side, Transparency International UK ranks Ukraine 120th out of 180 countries for corruption. Backing up his words, during the 2019 Ukrainian election, Mr. Onyshchenko posted a one-million Ukrainian hryvnia (approximately $37,000 U.S.) prize to the journalistic investigation that would bring the Poroshenko administration to justice. Ukraine’s population and reformist leaders are taking a stand to fix their country. They need the help of the European Union and the United States, starting with investigative support concerning how much money was laundered and where it is hidden now. This will be the first step in recovering as much of the embezzled money as possible and bringing the criminals to trial. Establishing financial stability, reforming a corrupt government, applying the rule of law and national security can be achieved. The Zelensky administration, the Ukrainian people, the European Union and the United States all have a stake in Mr. Onyshchenko’s assessment: “We cannot fail this time.”
President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has taken his first official trip abroad, spending June 4–5 in Brussels meeting with European Union leaders. His message to them was clear: Ukraine’s foreign policy and commitment to European integration will not change during his five-year term. Zelenskiy also assured EU diplomats and creditors that the Ukrainian government is not considering defaulting on its international debt — contrary to the suggestion of his former business partner, billionaire oligarch Ihor Kolomoisky. Finally, he sent a message to both critics and allies: He is not going to be soft on Russia. Some of his opponents in Ukraine have tried to portray him as weak, incompetent, or even pro-Russian. The trip gave the president a chance to reassure European leaders of his pro-Western bona fides: support for joining the EU and NATO, tougher sanctions against Moscow, and efforts to free Ukrainian prisoners in Russia. “Not only Ukraine needs the European Union as a guarantor of its success as an independent and prosperous state, but also the European Union needs a democratic, friendly, stable, strong Ukraine,” Zelenskiy said on June 5. European integration The visit to Brussels was Zelenskiy’s debut on the international diplomatic scene. And the new Ukrainian leader — a former comedic actor without political experience who took office less than three weeks ago — stuck to a script largely written by his predecessor, Petro Poroshenko, who had secured the EU-Ukraine association agreement and visa-free travel for Ukrainians to the Schengen zone. “Ukraine will continue its path to the EU. European integration is the guarantee of Ukraine’s independence,” Zelenskiy said at a press briefing after his meeting with Donald Tusk, president of the European Council. Zelenskiy said that the priorities for his five-year term will be making anti-corruption agencies work effectively, judiciary reform, e-government, and bringing Ukrainians’ living standards up to the EU level. But the visit was not just about setting an agenda. It was also about introductions. Zelenskiy received a warm welcome from top EU officials. They agreed that the next EU-Ukraine summit will take place in Kyiv on July 8. During a photo op with European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, a reporter asked Juncker: “Are you missing Poroshenko?” He replied: “I have a new one.” Zelenskiy jokingly added in English: “I’m better. The new one is better (than) the old one.” NATO referendum Much to the dissatisfaction of the media, Zelenskiy opted not to hold any press conferences. He only appeared before the press to make formal statements after a meeting with Tusk and took two questions from journalists after a joint press briefing with Jens Stoltenberg, secretary general of NATO. All other meetings were reported by his press service. However, Zelenskiy did give one interview to a Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Ukrainian Service reporter in a very unusual setting: during his morning workout on the second day of his visit to the EU capital. Dressed in his gym clothes and pumping the pedals of a stationary bike, he promised that Ukraine will join NATO, but that the decision will be made through a national referendum. “We need to inform each Ukrainian about what NATO is, that it is not terrible. And when Ukrainians are ready, we will put this issue to a referendum, and Ukraine will definitely be in NATO,” he said. Speaking at a briefing with NATO’s Stoltenberg a day earlier, Zelenskiy expressed hope that his presidency will help improve Ukraine-NATO relations and renew dialogue between them. “We look forward to NATO in Ukraine. We need all the existing mechanisms that will help us on this path and any other one that the alliance will be ready to offer,” Zelenskiy said. But the primary goal now is to focus on internal improvements that will bring Ukraine closer to NATO standards, Zelenskiy said. “Proper implementation of the law on national security is my first task,” Zelenskiy said, adding to the list reforming the state security service, intelligence agencies, the defense industry, and democratic civilian control over the defense sector. Russia has strongly opposed NATO expansion to Ukraine and Georgia, two former Soviet states that have drifted away from Moscow’s orbit and have sought membership in the western military alliance. Defying the worst predictions of his opponents, Zelenskiy sent a strong signal: He will not capitulate to Russia, which has occupied parts of Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region and its Crimean peninsula and waged a war that has taken the lives of some 13,000 people. In Brussels, he called on the EU to increase sanctions against Russia, where dozens of Ukrainian political prisoners and prisoners of war are held. Despite a ruling by the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea, Moscow has refused to release 24 Ukrainian sailors captured in an attack on Ukrainian navy vessels last November. “We are ready to negotiate with Russia. We are ready to implement the Minsk peace agreements,” Zelenskiy said, referring to a series of peace negotiations based in the Belarusian capital. Before his visit to Brussels, Zelenskiy reappointed ex-President Leonid Kuchma to lead the Ukraine delegation to the Minsk talks and tasked him with Kyiv’s priorities for negotiations with Moscow: a ceasefire, a prisoner swap, and humanitarian relief. The NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg (R) and President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskiy give a press conference after their bilateral meeting at the Nato headquarters in Brussels on June 4, 2019. (AFP) Default on debt Zelenskiy also had to assure wary European diplomats that he is not in thrall to billionaire oligarch Kolomoisky and he was not going to take the oligarch’s advice on defaulting on Ukraine’s foreign debt. “These are rumors. These are elaborate campaigns that have nothing in common with my official position,” Zelenskiy said during his meeting with Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission’s vice-president, on June 4. The oligarch’s latest interview with the Financial Times, in which he advised the new president to follow Greece’s example and default on the country’s external debt, agitated foreign creditors like EU banks and the International Monetary Fund. Zelenskiy’s entertainment business has been in long-time partnership with Kolomoisky’s television channel 1+1, which played a role in the success of the comedian’s election campaign by providing prime airtime to his shows. The two men also shared some business partners. Concerns over the oligarch’s suspected influence over the president increased when Kolomoisky returned to Ukraine after two years in self-imposed exile and Zelenskiy appointed the oligarch’s lawyer, Andriy Bohdan, as his chief of staff. Some speculated that Kolomoisky supported Zelenskiy’s presidential bid to serve his own commercial interests in Ukraine, particularly regaining control of PrivatBank, previously owned by the oligarch and his business partner Gennadiy Boholyubov. The Ukrainian government nationalized PrivatBank in 2016 after an independent audit revealed the bank had been used to embezzle $5.5 billion in the span of a decade. Kolomoisky and the National Bank of Ukraine filed a number of lawsuits against each other in Ukraine, London, and, most recently, in the American state of Delaware. The Ukrainian government is trying to recover some of the stolen funds, and Kolomoisky has challenged the legitimacy of PrivatBank’s nationalization. Up until his appointment as chief of staff, Bohdan represented Kolomoisky in the PrivatBank case. Zelenskiy used his Brussels trip to send the message that he won’t be protecting Kolomoisky’s interests. “Regarding PrivatBank, I protect only the state, only citizens,” Zelenskiy said in Brussels. “I am not interested in the games of former owners in courts. I am not going to be on their side.”
The Kremlin on Tuesday warned Ukraine’s new President Volodymyr Zelensky against asking Washington for more sanctions against Russia, suggesting it would not help his efforts to end the war in the east. President Vladimir Putin’s spokesman made the comments after US Secretary of Energy Rick Perry said in Kiev that Washington intended to impose sanctions on companies involved in the Moscow-led Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline project. On Monday, Zelensky was sworn in as Ukraine’s president and said his priority was ending the conflict with Russia-backed insurgents in the east, which has claimed some 13,000 lives since 2014. In a meeting with US officials including Perry on Monday, Zelensky called on Washington to introduce more sanctions against Moscow. “This is the rhetoric that will not help Ukraine to sort out the problem of the southeast,” said Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov, referring to the separatist conflict in the ex-Soviet country’s industrial east. Zelensky had told the US delegation that also included US Senator Ron Johnson that Washington should keep “increasing sanctions” against Moscow. “We will not be able to overcome Russian aggression in Donbass and Crimea alone,” Zelensky was quoted as saying by his office in reference to the eastern regions and Crimea, annexed by Russia in 2014. Peskov said Ukraine should stick to the Western-brokered “Minsk” peace plan – which is largely moribund – if it wanted to settle the conflict. “The US cannot fulfil a list (of requirements) of the Minsk agreements. Russia cannot fulfil them either,” he said. “It is Kiev which can and must fulfil them.” He played Ukraine’s president on TV, now he’s the real one The Kremlin has refused to congratulate Zelensky on his landslide election victory last month or the inauguration.
What, then, might make Moscow apprehensive about a Zelensky presidency? I believe there are two factors in play. First, while democratic elections and the crushing defeat of an incumbent in Ukraine will not by themselves impress many Russians, they point to something potentially highly subversive for the Putin model of governance and for Russian policy in the post-Soviet space. Poroshenko ran for reelection on the record of his first term and could boast of some formidable accomplishments: consolidating the Ukrainian national identity, halting (if not reversing) the Russian-cum-separatist erosion of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, building up the country’s military capabilities, and securing ecclesiastical independence for a Ukrainian Orthodox Church. Nevertheless, he richly deserved the trouncing he received at the polls because of his abject failure to tackle Ukraine’s chronic injustice, exemplified by the power of the oligarchs and the country’s endemic corruption. Zelensky now has an opportunity to make good on the thus-far unrealized promise of the 2004 Orange Revolution and the 2014 Revolution of Dignity—to curb the power of the oligarchs, to reduce pervasive corruption, and to level the economic playing field in Ukraine. Russians might actually sit up and take notice if Kyiv managed to cut Ukraine’s oligarchs down to size, remediate the ubiquitous bribery and bureaucratism that plague everyday life, reduce the country’s obscene income disparities, and create the conditions for broadly based economic growth and rising incomes. If Ukraine’s relative freedom became associated in popular Russian thought not with anarchy and arbitrariness but with a modicum of justice and prosperity, the repercussions for Russia could be earth-shaking—or at least regime-shaking. Considering Ukraine’s rampant corruption and injustice, it should take only modest effort on Zelensky’s part to show some improvement—and his daring inaugural announcement to dissolve the Rada and hold snap parliamentary elections suggests a determination to take the corruption bull by the horns. Aside from casting the Putin model of governance in a negative light, a serious Ukrainian reform policy would undermine the Russian goal of perpetuating and maximizing Ukraine’s isolation from Europe. Various Russian (and some Western) analysts have lauded Russia’s military interventions in Crimea and the Donbas for supposedly preventing Ukrainian accession to Euro-Atlantic organizations, particularly NATO, both in the short and long terms. There was, of course, no short-term prospect of Ukraine joining NATO in 2014, and arguably the biggest impediment to Ukraine’s Euro-Atlantic integration has not been the reality or threat of Russian military action but the country’s unreformed, oligarch-ridden legal, social, and economic framework. Under current conditions, it is difficult to imagine any country ratifying Ukraine’s accession to either NATO or the European Union. Therefore, a comprehensive reform effort by Zelensky would give prospective Ukrainian membership in Euro-Atlantic organizations a plausibility that it has heretofore lacked. Moreover, a sustained Ukrainian-Western rapprochement on the basis of root-and-branch reform, laying a solid foundation for eventual accession to Euro-Atlantic organizations, would not only undermine the conceit that Russia can thwart Ukraine’s European vocation (which ultimately can only be thwarted by Ukrainians themselves), but also devalue the occupied Donbas as an instrument of Russian policy with respect to Kyiv. Second, regardless of the success of Ukrainian reform under Zelensky, the election of a Russophone President will probably prove—once again—to be a bitter disappointment for Moscow, changing at best the tone and the pace but not the overall trajectory of the Russo-Ukrainian “long goodbye.” Zelensky has not repudiated his predecessor’s legacy when it comes to consolidating the Ukrainian national identity, nor does he have any domestic political reason to do so. He might ratchet down nationalist rhetoric and relax the pace of linguistic Ukrainianization, but he will not reverse the inexorable improvement in the population’s overall Ukrainian-language facility, nor the increased use of Ukrainian in public discourse at the expense of Russian. While some expansion of Russo-Ukrainian economic ties might be feasible, it remains to be seen how much either Moscow or the Ukrainian parliament would permit the restoration of trade or investment. Indeed, the announced restrictions on Russian hydrocarbon sales to Ukraine suggest a tightening rather than a loosening of the economic screws. With regard to the simmering conflict in the Donbas, Zelensky inherits the same set of unpalatable options that Poroshenko faced. He can: recognize the independence of the Russian-controlled separatist entities and let them go; accept terms for their reintegration into Ukraine that would leave them under Moscow’s effective control and give them a veto over national policy; or continue the desultory shelling and positional maneuvering that have characterized the stalemated conflict since 2015. Other theoretical options—Russian abandonment of the separatists or a Ukrainian Reconquista of the Donbas—are completely unrealistic within the timeframe of Zelensky’s term of office. His default option is therefore likely to be further strengthening of the Ukrainian army, military cooperation with Western partners, and maintenance of the status quo along the line of contact. Tinkering with the negotiating format will have no effect whatsoever. In sum, under Zelensky we might anticipate some easing of Russo-Ukrainian tensions without, however, any change to positions of principle, much as in Georgia following the 2012 change of regime—what Vladimir Socor has dubbed “coexistence without real normalization.” This outcome should surprise no one, since Zelensky’s election in no way alters the underlying dynamic of the Russo-Ukrainian conflict. In his public pronouncements since the Ukrainian elections, Putin has doubled down on his flawed notion that Russians and Ukrainians are “really” one nation—which is to say that Ukrainians are really just Russians. The denigration implicit in Putin’s thinking is exemplified in widespread Russian ridicule of all things Ukrainian, particularly the language. While deprecating Ukraine is a tried-and-true method for pandering to the sense of Russian superiority, this overbearing “older brother” complex sits rather badly with Ukrainians, even Russophone ones. Ukrainians, by and large, remain well-disposed toward Russians, if not necessarily toward Kremlin policies. Most of them would warmly welcome a normalization of Russo-Ukrainian ties, but few seem prepared to accept the loss of their national identity as the price for doing so. The conferring of autocephaly on the Orthodox Church of Ukraine by the Patriarch of Constantinople in January is emblematic of the conundrum facing the Kremlin. The creation of a canonical Orthodox Church of Ukraine independent of Moscow unfolded over a period of many months, during which the vociferous and increasingly frantic objections of the Russian government and the Moscow Patriarchate abjectly failed to derail the process. Subsequently very little has changed outwardly in Ukraine. The new Orthodox Church of Ukraine has absorbed most of the Orthodox parishes that had previously declined to accept the jurisdiction of the Moscow Patriarch. Some 500 parishes have reportedly switched allegiance from the Moscow Patriarchate to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, but they represent only about 4 percent of the Moscow Patriarchate’s 12,000 parishes in the country. A stampede of parishes from the Moscow Patriarchate to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine is unlikely. The cumulative psychological impact over time, however, is likely to be profound. Ukrainian Orthodox believers can now worship in a national church that is fully canonical. It is no longer possible to imagine that the heretofore-schismatic Ukrainian Orthodox churches could be nudged, gently or more forcefully, back into the bosom of the Moscow Patriarchate. The latter will retain a substantial footprint in Ukraine, with sizeable congregations of ethnic Russians as well as non-Russians who prefer the liturgy in Church Slavonic rather than Ukrainian. However, the supposition that Orthodoxy in Ukraine is merely and exclusively a branch of the Russian Orthodox Church has been demolished forever. The umbilical cord has been cut and cannot be rejoined. Even for non-Orthodox Ukrainians, the battle for autocephaly was a gratifying opportunity to cock a snook at Moscow. It was a prime example of an all-too-frequent experience for Putin in the post-Soviet space: failing to get his way no matter how high the priority or how hard he tries. For Westerners inclined to view Putin as an evil genius manipulating our political systems in frightening and unfavorable ways, his inability to block autocephaly for the Orthodox Church in Ukraine—a country where the Kremlin has a vast array of levers at its disposal and where the stakes could hardly be higher—is a stunning and salutary display of impotence. Hence, Moscow’s dyspeptic and even spiteful reaction to Zelensky’s election is a token of business as usual in post-Soviet Russo-Ukrainian relations. After an unbroken string of Ukrainian leaders—even avowedly pro-Russian ones—who failed to meet Russian expectations, the Kremlin is understandably reluctant to indulge in wishful thinking. Unfortunately, this clear-eyed, even praiseworthy realism about the short-term possibilities for relations with Ukraine is undermined by the illusions that appear to cloud longer-term Russian thinking about “Little Russia.” This fantasizing includes: nostalgia for an Eastern Slavic unity that arguably never was, and that certainly hasn’t existed for centuries; a pious belief that the persistent Russophilia of so many Ukrainians provides a promising basis for their assimilation and absorption by the Russians; and the sullen conviction that the Ukrainian nation and state are artificial entities created and sustained by malevolent Westerners. Alas, Russian maximalism with regard to Ukraine will always bump up against the awkward conviction of most Ukrainians, even Russophone ones, that they constitute a separate nation—one that possesses its own cherished linguistic and cultural attributes, and has national interests that do not necessarily coincide with Russia’s. Because there is probably little he can or would even want to do to change this dynamic, Zelensky will inevitably disappoint and frustrate Moscow. More alarmingly, far-reaching reforms could create a Ukraine perceived not only as more democratic than Russia but also as more just. In this regard, Zelensky the Russophone populist, much more so than Poroshenko the oligarchic nationalist, threatens to wreak serious havoc on Putinism. No wonder the Kremlin has given Zelensky such a chilly reception. However, the comedian just might have the last laugh.
How is his administration going to treat the Minsk agreements? Will it try to restore trade relations, relaunch flights between the two countries, and ease the visa regime for Russian citizens? What will happen with the Russian language question? Most importantly, how will it continue to draw attention to Russian aggression in the West, including through court cases in the International Court of Justice in the Hague and other institutions? Although officially there is much talk about "restarting dialogue" with Ukraine, it is important to understand that for Putin, improving relations not only is not a priority but it, in fact, could be detrimental. His propaganda machine needs a target, which to constantly portray as a failed state and use it in order to scare the Russian population into appreciation of the current Russian regime. If relations improve and the negative propaganda has to stop and if the situation in Ukraine improves and becomes, say, as good as in Poland or the Baltic states, then the Russian public could start thinking about the benefits of democracy and a coloured revolution. For this reason, a reconciliation with Ukraine even on Russia's terms is rather dangerous for Putin, especially now that his rating has fallen to a record low. At the same time, very bad relations with Kiev are also a problem. If there is one question that brings together all 27 states of the EU, it is the sanctions against Russia; for five years now, they have unanimously agreed on extending them. The need for sanctions is also one of the few issues of agreement between Washington and Brussels these days. An even bigger problem for Putin is the fact that because of Ukraine, none of the Western countries can go back to "business as usual" with Russia. Other transgressions may be forgotten, but not the occupation of Ukrainian territory. In this sense, the ideal scenario for Putin is for the frozen conflict to persist but without any escalation and a certain level of engagement. But would Ukraine fall for that? Would it stop making noise in the West and engage with Russia, so that European countries can start dealing with Moscow again without risking their reputation? Would Zelensky allow for such a development? A lot of Ukrainians voted for Poroshenko fearing exactly such scenario playing out if his opponent were to win, but it is quite difficult to believe this would happen. Yes, Zelensky indeed does not have a prepared programme and it's not clear how well he actually understands the political scene, and specifically Ukrainian-Russian relations. He portrayed himself as the "average Ukrainian", and an average Ukrainian doesn't have necessarily understand all political subtleties. The populist Zelensky used his lack of experience and status as a political outsider to his advantage in the electoral campaign, just as Trump did back in 2016, and as a result, many of his opponents believe that would make him susceptible to the manipulations of the Kremlin and oligarchs.   But paradoxically, it might be populism that ends up saving Zelensky from such a dangerous scenario. Populists are those politicians who make promises that appeal to ordinary people and they tend to be committed to fulfilling them. Trump, for example, is being criticised not for failing to fulfil his campaign promises, but actually for trying to realise them in full, whether it's the wall on the border with Mexico, the protectionist trade policies, migration bans or the cutting of social programmes. Zelensky, for his part, has promised to rein in oligarchs, not to deal with any of Putin's "friends", and allay the fears some Ukrainians (especially in the east) have about joining NATO. Тhe main difference between Zelensky and Trump is that they face two very different political systems. The US president is well aware that, in the worst-case scenario, he would simply lose his re-election bid. The system of checks and balances based on various state institutions limits his power but does not threaten him: impeachment by the Congress is highly unlikely, especially after the Mueller probe did not result in an obstruction of justice charge. In Ukraine, on the other hand, the system of checks and balances is not based on institutions - because they are still weak - but on the streets. Popular mobilisation against the missteps of unpopular presidents has already led two successful revolutions in the past. In this sense, Zelensky has more political space to act, but he also risks a lot: losing the presidency and his freedom. Any sign of a rapprochement with Putin and the return of the oligarchy to the pre-2014 scale would cross the red line and provoke another uprising at the Maidan. Ruling politicians Georgia have been in a similar situation for the past 10 years. Since the 2008 Georgian-Russian war and the Russian annexation of territories, no Georgian political power has dared raise the question of starting a dialogue with Putin. Despite some persistent political problems, going back to the previous political system which was prone to Russian interference is impossible. Today the main guarantee for stability in Georgia is not the justice system or the parliament, but the streets. This, of course, does not mean that Zelensky would necessarily be a good president. But he has the opportunity not only to strengthen Ukraine's democratic institutions, but also to unify the country. It is important to note that Zelensky managed to win all regions except Lvov in the west, meaning he managed to overcome the political division between west and east, which had been deepened by the war and the reckless use of ethnopolitics by various powers (including Poroshenko who resorted to it during his desperate presidential campaign). If the new Ukrainian president manages to maintain this popularity and cement the unity of the nation, then this would undermine even more the Kremlin's attempts to manipulate public opinion in Ukraine. In other words, if Zelensky is successful in keeping the country united and escalating pressure on Russia, the Kremlin might soon come to bitterly regret Poroshenko's defeat.
Despite the announcement of another ceasefire on June 5 amid peace negotiations in Minsk, militants shelled the lines held by the Azov Regiment — a controversial unit of Ukraine’s National Guard affiliated with the country’s far-right — with banned 122-millimeter howitzers and 120-millimeter mortars, according to the Join Forces Operation press service. A 122-millimeter shell directly hit an Azov dugout, killing two fighters, the Interior Ministry said early on June 7. Later in the day, Azov identified the two soldiers as 28-year-old Dmytro Pryhlo, an Azov serviceman since 2014 and a company morale officer, and 23-year-old Maksym Oleksiuk, who had served since 2017. “This war crime demonstrates for the umpteenth time that any agreements with Russia or its… puppets are worthless,” the Azov press service said, adding that the regiment would have revenge for its fallen comrades-in-arms. Dmytro Pryglo, an Azov Regiment fighter killed on the night of June 6-7. Maksym Oleksiuk, an Azov Regiment fighter killed on the night of June 6-7 As a result of the attack, 8 more soldiers were injured. Later in the day, the Ukrainian military reported that four soldiers wounded at Novoluhanske were hospitalized with moderately severe bodily injures and four more suffered concussions. According to the Defense Ministry, Ukrainian lines near Mariupol, an Azov Sea port city of over 440,000 people located 720 kilometers southeast of Kyiv, were also attacked by militants on the night of June 6-7. “In virtually every attack, whenever it was possible, our defenders offered a decent response to the enemy and returned fire,” the military said.
The Presidential Administration later reacted to the deadly incident at Novoluhanske, saying that President Volodymyr Zelenskiy considered the shelling attacks an indication that Russia was losing control of the militants in Donbas. “We hope the Russian side will restore its control over these formations,” the presidential press service said, adding that the president offered his condolences to the families of the soldiers killed in action and thanked the Ukrainian servicepeople for their “courage and strength.” Ukraine will continue pushing for an armistice and prisoner exchange, the statement said. “Shelling Ukrainian military servicepeople is an obvious regular attempt to undermine ceasefire negotiations,” the press service quoted Zelenskiy as saying. “No matter who gave the order, the Armed Forces of Ukraine will give a harsh and adequate answer. And at the diplomatic level, our stance regarding the necessity of halting fire and setting prisoners of war free will remain firm and unchanged.” The situation in Donbas has sharply deteriorated over past few days since the Trilateral Contact Group of Russia, Ukraine and the Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe (OSCE) met on June 5 after a long hiatus, with former Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma again representing Kyiv.
Among other forces, Russia has deployed three air defense divisions equipped with S400 missiles. The Russian Federation has amassed in the temporarily occupied Crimea a 30,000-strong military force, planning to increase the contingent by another 7,000-10,000 by 2025, that's according to Vadym Skybytskiy, acting deputy commander of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine. "During the period following the annexation of Crimea, the Russian command deployed a grouping on the peninsula, which now amounts to over 30,000 troops," Skybytskiy wrote in a response to an UNIAN inquiry. It is also noted that until 2025, an increase by 7,000-10,000 military cannot be ruled out. Among other forces, Russia has deployed three air defense divisions equipped with S400 missiles, the report says. Since 2014, the Russian Black Sea Fleet has been replenished with six submarines and five ships, carrying Kalibr cruise missiles, the official added. In March 2014, after the introduction of its troops, Russia annexed the Ukrainian Crimea, having organized a pseudo-referendum on self-determination. The self-proclaimed Crimean government stated that 96.77% were in favor of joining the Russian Federation. On March 18, 2014, the so-called agreement on the admission of Crimea and Sevastopol to the Russian Federation was signed in the Kremlin. Western countries never recognized the annexation of Crimea. They imposed sanctions against Russia. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine officially announced February 20, 2014, the date of the beginning of the temporary occupation of Crimea.
Ukraine has an energy security problem the size of the Dnipro river. This is despite boasting the third largest hydrocarbon endowment in Europe (after Russia and Norway) and a rapidly growing renewables sector. It also has an impressive, albeit aging, Soviet-era nuclear reactor fleet, and enough power generation capacity to be a net exporter of electricity in 2018. Yet the country is still unable to wrest energy-self sufficiency from Russia's iron grip. Until it does, it will not be able to enjoy true economic and political independence. A combination of overreliance on the Russian Federation for oil, gas, coal, and uranium, as well as a domestic energy sector in dire need of reform, are behind this precarious energy security situation. Though Ukraine no longer imports natural gas directly from its bellicose eastern neighbor, it is still reliant on energy giant Gazprom for natural gas transit fees. Ukraine is Russia’s primary transport route for Europe-bound gas and receives some $3 billion dollars in annual revenues – right around 2.5% of Ukraine’s GDP – for its role in this relationship. Furthermore, over 64% of Ukraine’s coal and 55% of its enriched uranium– two staples of the Ukrainian energy sector – still come from Russia. Russia also charges Ukraine for disposal of its spent nuclear waste. Beyond foreign dependencies, Ukraine has significant energy sector issues at home. Aging infrastructure is in dire need of maintenance and renewal. Energy markets are monopolistic, inefficient, and corruption-ridden. Over-regulation and complicated licensing procedures are preventing extraction of the plentiful oil and gas buried beneath the country’s soil, creating a less than attractive environment for up-stream investment. Renewables are making strides partially thanks to green-minded oligarchs, but alternative energy is still far from replacing Ukraine’s 55 gigawatts (GW) of legacy thermal and nuclear capacity. Together, these problems pose an existential challenge to Ukraine. The elephant in the room: Nord Stream II Large-scale transit of Russian gas via Ukraine to Europe is coming to an end with the launch of Gazprom’s $11 billion Nord Stream II project, which links Russia to Europe’s most voracious gas consumer – Germany. The 1,230 km pipeline circumvents Ukraine via the Baltic Sea, and once completed will double the existing 55 billion cubic meter (bcm) capacity of Nord Stream to 110 bcm. When viewed in conjunction with Gazprom’s 32 bcm TurkStream pipeline under the Black Sea to the south, the Kremlin’s strategy to by-pass Ukraine becomes obvious. Once operational, these two projects would be sufficient to make up ~90 bcm of gas that passes through Ukraine each year, thereby depriving Kyiv of its badly-needed transit fees. It also means that the Kremlin will no longer have an economic reason to hold back its aggression in future conflicts. In sum: Ukraine's economic and physical security benefits tremendously from Russia shipments. Russia is in the process of circumventing Ukraine entirely when it comes to natural gas exports Russia is in the process of circumventing Ukraine entirely when it comes to natural gas exports CENTER FOR EUROPEAN REFORM On December 31, 2019, the contract upholding those critical gas shipments is set to expire -- Gazprom will no longer be obligated to pump gas through Ukraine. But this doesn’t mean that gas will stop flowing through Ukraine immediately.
Ukraine has known relative peace for decades. For the clear majority of Ukrainians, the “last war” was World War II. In 2014 and 2015, the Minsk Protocol and Minsk II respectively, were agreed upon that attempted to alleviate the ongoing war in the Donbass. Both attempts at a cease-fire failed. Today, the Ukraine War exists as a “frozen conflict” or stalemate. Trenches have been dug and fighting continues along the contact line. Nearly 100,000 civilians are caught in the “gray zone” between the Ukrainian line of control and the insurgent’s line of control, including 21,000 children who live in Ukrainian-controlled villages and towns on the frontline. While the world focuses on the possibility of a trade war with China, President Trump’s relationships with porn stars and Russian involvement in Syria, a humanitarian crisis is unfolding in the middle of Europe. A report from the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission details illegal detentions, abductions and intimidation of election officials in the self-proclaimed pro-Russian republics. A report released in March of 2016 by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) said in separatist-controlled areas there was a “complete absence of rule of law, reports of arbitrary detention, torture and incommunicado detention, and no access to real redress mechanisms.” Often, pro-Russia forces will fire mortars or Grad rockets from inside residential areas and then quickly move on. These attacks trigger a retaliation bombardment by government forces long after the separatists have left. The only casualties are civilians.
Five years after the beginning of hostilities, civilians continue to pay a heavy price. Two million people currently live in areas where danger is everywhere: in the air with constant shelling, in the soil with chemical contamination, or on the ground with landmines. Nadejda Khomenko, founder of “The Country of Free People,” a volunteer organization that brings humanitarian aid to people living in the grey area on both sides of the contact line, describes vividly the practical problems that affect the people stuck in the conflict zone. The elderly often do not have enough to eat. Unemployment is endemic, as coal mines and large factories are closed. Schools are regularly targeted on both sides, and 750 education facilities have so far been damaged. The housing crisis is also glaring as 50,000 civilian homes were destroyed and another 40,000 were damaged on both sides of the contact line. Before the war, the Donbass was a densely populated and heavily urbanized area, organized around mines and large factories. Nearly half of the area’s infrastructure is in need of repair, impeding water and electricity supply. The situation is particularly acute in the area that stretches for 15 kilometers on both sides of the demarcation line with many small cities and two big cities in its vicinity: the government-controlled city of Mariupol and the separatist-held city of Donetsk. Mariupol has some 500,000 inhabitants, including 100,000 IDPs. It experiences numerous logistical problems linked to its hemmed-in position. As the main port city of the Azov Sea, it also bears the brunt of the maritime blockade imposed by the Russian Black Sea Fleet since the opening of the bridge connecting Russia to Crimea. As a result of the sharp decline in steel exports, unemployment increased and youth migration accelerated. The areas under government control have also suffered from the full economic blockade imposed by their own government under then-President Petro Poroshenko in 2017, in response to the pressure exerted by Ukrainian nationalist and veteran groups and to the nationalization of 43 enterprises by separatist authorities. The ban on economic transactions across the contact line has not only worsened Ukraine’s trade balance, but also weakened the local economy in the entire region. The lack of infrastructure and economic opportunities add to a growing sense of abandonment among the population. Concurrently, Russia invests in the separatist territories, where, according to some returnees surveyed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to my own private discussions, the social and sanitary situations have improved. Buses run regularly and on time, medical facilities and hospitals operate, and the prices are generally much lower than in the rest of Ukraine (for instance, water is three times cheaper, and medical care remains affordable). This assessment should be interpreted cautiously, however, as a Ukrainian survey contradicts those accounts. Russia also tries to appeal to civilians from the other side. Since 2018 a program called “Reunification of the Donbass people” has allowed civilians living on the government-controlled side to get medical treatment for free in the separatist territories, including oncology patients. The program was launched around the time that health-care reform entered into force in Ukraine and increased prices for consultations and medications. Furthermore, this past spring, Russian President Vladimir Putin offered a fast-track process for acquiring Russian citizenship to people living in separatist territories. These developments may make Russia more attractive and erode the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state in the eyes of a population in desperate straits.
It’s been a very bad month for Washington’s relations with Moscow, culminating in the Trump administration’s ill-advised decision to authorize the commercial sale of “defensive” weapons to Ukraine. The flippant comment that Secretary of Defense James Mattis expressed earlier in Kiev apparently summarizes the administration’s attitude. According to Mattis, “defensive weapons are not provocative unless you are an aggressor, and clearly Ukraine is not an aggressor.” The reality is that given the already lengthy record of U.S. meddling in Ukraine, especially encouraging the demonstrators who overthrew the country’s pro-Russian elected president in 2014, moving to arm Ukraine is extremely provocative. That country not only is in Russia’s sphere of influence, it is the single most important entity in Russia’s core security zone.
An uptick in Russian naval activity and U.S. freedom-of-navigation ops mean more tension in 2019. 2019 could be a tense year in the waters of the Baltic and Black Seas between the U.S. and Russia, as demonstrated by an uptick of Russian naval activity in both regions. At the same time, Ukraine is reaching out more than ever to the United States or help, leaving Washington in the position of figuring out how to manage the needs of an ally under attack against the peril of escalating conflict. On Sunday, Russia “scrambled” a pair of warships to tail the U.S. destroyers Porter and Gravely in the Baltic Sea, Russian media outlet TASS reported. On Tuesday, the Russians simulated missile attacks on “sea targets,” a test of the targeting systems of the BAL coastal missiles deployed to the Baltic oblast of Kaliningrad, reported TASS. A thousand miles to the southeast, Russia recently deployed a BAL to the illegally annexed Black Sea peninsula of Crimea, and staged additional exercises there in December. This week, the U.S. destroyer Donald Cook arrived in the Sea to replace the dock landing ship Fort McHenry. “The U.S. Navy routinely operates in the Black Sea consistent with the Montreux Convention” — the treaty governing the Black Sea —“and international law. We expect other actors operating in the region to obey international law and avoid behaviors that would be considered unsafe or escalatory in nature,” Pentagon spokesperson Eric Pahon said. The U.S. naval moves take place after a major uptick in hostilities between Ukraine and Russia in the nearby Sea of Azov, connected to the Black Sea via the narrow Kerch Strait. In November, Russian forces seized Ukrainian vessels and sailors there in an attack Ukraine says was premeditated. Chatter in the region is up. “There’s been a lot of interesting Russian radio activity in the Southern military district…radio listeners reported multiple brigade and division chatter started yesterday evening. Possible readiness [exercise] coming up?” said Aki Heikkinen, curator of the site Russianmilitarywatch.com. If tensions continue to rise, history suggests that U.S. forces should prepare for an increase in electronic warfare, or EW, attacks. During the Azov Sea crisis, “Russian military units attacked Ukrainian ships with sophisticated EW methods,” Adm. Ihor Voronchenko, the commander of the Ukrainian Navy, told Defense One in December. Speaking through an interpreter, Voronchenko said the Russians disrupted the Iridium satellite communication system that Ukraine uses and spoofed GPS signals in the region. During Voronchenko’s visit to the United States he said, he met with U.S. Navy CNO Adm. John Richardson and other officials at the departments of Defense and State. The Ukrainian admiral asked for help acquiring Island-class and Mark VI patrol boats and various electronic sensors in 2018 to 2025. The State Department soon after asked Congress for an additional $10 million for the Ukrainian navy. Lawmakers have yet to take up the request. It’s one of several signs of a growing partnership. Since 2014, the United States has given Ukraine aid worth over $1 billion. Some $42 million of that came through the Global Security Contingency Fund, or GSCF — a pot of money largely funded by Defense but administered jointly by the Defense Department and State to better spread it across foreign government agencies. State officials say the money is helping Ukraine build up its National Guard, stand up its special operations forces teams, and advance toward interoperability with NATO. “You can see a lot of impact on the ground” an official affiliated with the program said. The official said that training and funds were helping more Ukrainian troops survive clashes with Russian-backed forces in Eastern Ukraine. “Survivability is up. Folks are coming back,” said the official. The official said there’s one more that the U.S. government can do, and at relatively low cost, to help in the fight: allow more foreign military sales to Ukraine.
As the stalemate of fighting in eastern Ukraine approaches four years, analysts say a recent U.S. decision to provide Kiev with lethal arms may pose a familiar question to Washington: How far will America go to assist Ukraine? Both Ukrainian and Russian officials label the U.S. assistance, approved by the Trump administration at the Pentagon's suggestion in late December, as a significant increase in collaboration between Washington and Kiev. But American officials have repeatedly tamped down the significance, saying the arms are merely defensive measures. RELATED CONTENT Russia Has Deployed Thousands of Tanks,… The arms deal, analysts warn, threatens to entangle Washington more deeply in the Ukrainian conflict at a time when violence in eastern Ukraine is increasing and the U.S. is occupied with conflicts in Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq. At the beginning of his first year in office, President Donald Trump chose to follow the path of his predecessor, Barack Obama, and not provide arms to Ukrainians out of concern that it would increase tensions with Russia. But U.S.-Russia relations have steadily worsened in the past 12 months, and many analysts say that when Washington and Kiev reached the deal in late December, it was a nod to conservative hawks in his Republican Party. Moscow, however, says the arms deal is dangerous and accuses the U.S. of threatening to provoke an uptick in fighting. U.S. officials have yet to specify what the military aid will comprise, but several unnamed officials have said it will include the anti-tank Javelin missiles that Ukraine has been asking for since war broke out with Russian-backed forces in 2014. Samuel Charap from the RAND Corporation says Javelins are a "politically charged issue." The Ukrainian army has more pressing needs, Charap says, such as more radar and secure communications systems. This is especially true after Russia's success in thwarting the Ukrainian army's ability to communicate with itself. Russia has demonstrated, Charap says, that it is not sensitive to financial or human losses to achieve an objective. He further expressed doubt that the U.S. is prepared to respond in the event of an escalation between the two sides. "U.S. involvement with a big symbolic decision like this means people will then argue that U.S. prestige is on the line," Charap says. "It's not going to give Ukraine a dramatic improvement in its capabilities on the battlefield and it also has all these potential negative consequences." Others, such as Michael Carpenter, deputy assistant secretary of defense on Ukraine and Russia in the Obama administration, agrees with the White House's decision, saying that the lethal assistance will act a significant deterrent to any future territorial ambitions. According to Carpenter, it is likely to give the green light to other countries to allow arm sales to Ukraine which will altogether make the war more costly for Russia. RELATED CONTENT Blockade Stokes Ukraine's Anxiety Justin Bronk, a weapons expert with the Royal United Services Institute, says the Javelins would be highly effective against Russian tanks but questioned the choice of supplying anti-tank missiles as there has not been a tank battle since February 2015. Russia forcibly annexed Crimea in February and March 2014, a move that set off fighting between Ukrainian soldiers and Russian-backed fighters in eastern Ukraine. The Minsk agreements were signed by France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine in 2015 and banned artillery and heavy weapons at the contact line, also called the line of demarcation. In late December, Western diplomats and observers said the fighting in eastern Ukraine had suddenly escalated and was the heaviest in nearly a year. Officials from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe say the fighting from 2017 to early February 2018 is worse than in 2016. The fighting has claimed the lives of more than 10,000 people – both fighters and civilians – and forced more than a million to flee their homes.
America’s recent decision to authorize the sale and delivery of Javelin anti-tank missile systems to Ukraine was shortsighted and dangerous to all parties involved.[1] The provision of the Javelin weapons system, in particular, serves as little more than a symbolic gesture. In the end, the authorization will likely prove a maneuver in optics, not strategy. Furthermore, recent developments suggest the Ukrainian government, in an effort to secure the deal, may have interfered with the ongoing special counsel investigation in the United States.[2] The following delineates the reasoning behind this conclusion, puts forward some of the stronger arguments in favor of the authorization, and describes why they are misguided. Amid the fraught U.S.-Russia relations of late, it is vital for American policymakers to consider each geopolitical decision with the utmost care, ensuring the best interests of the United States and her allies are always kept in mind.[3] An appropriate policy would include forgoing any further sale of lethal weaponry, replacing it instead with increased funds and non-lethal materiel such as counter-electronic warfare (EW) technology and the deployment of additional troops on a strictly train-and-advise basis. Soldiers with 2nd Cavalry Regiment fire FGM-148 Javelin anti-tank missiles during a combined arms live fire training exercise at the Estonian Defense Forces central training area in Estonia. (Ben Houtkooper/Aiir Source Military/YouTube) The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has claimed over 10,000 lives and forced over a million more to flee their homes.[4] Taking these figures into consideration, it is evident that decisive action is necessary; thus far, however, the United States has taken the wrong approach. Arming Ukraine with Javelin anti-tank missiles runs the risk of reigniting what has become a relatively static engagement between the Ukrainian Army and Russian-backed separatists.[5] Skirmishes occur on a daily basis, and casualties continue to accrue, but a sudden injection of Western munitions into the hands of the Ukrainian Army is likely to prompt a disproportionate response from the side of the Russians, a reaction not without histojn rical precedence.[6] Assuming the Russians respond not in kind, but with asymmetric force, where does that leave the United States? Is the United States to perpetually provide bigger and better arms as the process persists in some sort of vicious iteration of Robert Jervis’s spiral model?[7] For now, Russia has far more at stake in this conflict. With his population’s support and at least six more years at the helm, Vladimir Putin can and will broaden his country’s efforts in the region if need be.[8] Even if the United States were committed to meet every response with more firepower, the Russians have the overwhelming advantage of geography. Russia’s shared border with Ukraine, one that is reportedly near-impossible to effectively monitor, enables expedited resupplies.[9] Putin’s relative autonomy in terms of foreign policy decisions also adds to the potential for a rapid response. Furthermore, it is prudent to consider how Ukrainians may interpret the signaling of receiving lethalarms from America. Inspired by the renewed and augmented support of the Americans, this move could embolden Ukrainians to begin launching assaults, thus producing an avoidable escalation scenario. Many like to frame the conversation as providing so-called defensive weapons rather than offensive, but in reality, there is no logical distinction between the two.[10] The Ukrainians using these weapons to go on an offensive, making the U.S. an indirect accomplice in violating the Minsk Agreement, remains a real possibility and a real concern of those monitoring the situation closely.[11] Alexander Lukashenko, Vladimir Putin, Angela Merkel, Francois Hollande, and Petro Poroshenko take part in the talks on a settlement to the situation in Ukraine in Minsk, 2015. (The Russian Presidential Press and Information Office/Wikimedia) From a purely practical standpoint, providing Ukraine with Javelins makes little sense. While the provision of such weapons would certainly generate substantial repercussions due to the symbolism of the action, their usefulness on the battlefield would be virtually imperceptible. In fact, former commander of U.S. Army Europe remarked in 2015 that the Ukrainian Army having Javelin missiles “would not change the situation strategically in a positive way.”[12] Ukraine has no need for Javelin missiles, as it already produces its own comparable varieties of anti-tank weaponry.[13] The Ukrainian Army is well-equipped for situations that require anti-tank capabilities, thus it is redundant to provide them with more. Furthermore, the conflict has largely steered away from tank warfare, further highlighting the superfluity of Javelin sales.[14] The provision of other lethal arms in general is similarly excessive. Since the outbreak of the conflict, the Ukrainian Army has improved its capabilities in almost every aspect of warfare by orders of magnitude. Ukraine’s current air, land, and sea means are unrecognizable in comparison to those of 2014.[15] If anything, the United States should be increasing support to help Ukraine counter the innovative electronic warfare the Russian-backed separatists are waging in the east.[16] An electronic warfare package would be immensely more advantageous to the effort in Ukraine. The package could include products such as the THOR III, CREW jammer, or MODI II systems, as well as a contingent of U.S. electronic warfare specialists to train Ukrainian soldiers using a strategy akin to the one released by the Pentagon in 2017.[17] This recent Department of Defense approach lays emphasis on the integration of burgeoning electronic warfare capabilities throughout the gamut of military operations, the use of cost-effective technology in lieu of conventional arms, and the coordination of preparedness training for the rigors of conflict in the electromagnetic spectrum.[18] A U.S. Marine carrying a Thor II backpack-mounted counter IED jammer in Nimroz province, Afghanistan, Dec. 2, 2011. (Cpl. Timothy Solano/U.S. Marine Corps Photo) These systems, among others, could make a genuine difference in an electronic warfare space currently dominated by the Russians.[19] As an added benefit, Ukrainian troops could later be debriefed by their American counterparts on how the technology fared in real-world application against the current leader in electronic warfare tactics, providing valuable insight to be used in future strategic planning. To further assist, the United States could take the advice of a February 2018 Carnegie report, which suggests the problem the Ukrainian Army faces now is not one of hardware, but of structure, and a key component of successful reform is the expansion of Western training efforts.[20] It is also imperative to acknowledge the likelihood of American-made weapons systems winding up in the hands other than those for whom they were intended. Time and again, U.S.-supplied weapons are either stolen from the anticipated beneficiary or never make it there in the first place. In just the last decade, this happened in Libya, Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, Somalia, Yemen, and Mexico.[21] In Ukraine, the worry would be that the Javelins provided by America could make their way into the arms of either some sort of extremist Ukrainian militia such as the Azov Battalion or the very same Russian-backed separatists the weapons were meant to combat.[22] The Ukrainian Army has lost control of countless weapons that have then found their way onto the streets and online marketplaces.[23] In one instance, Ukrainian Army vehicles were taken by separatists in broad daylight and subsequently paraded about.[24] More importantly, non-lethal U.S. military equipment, such as mortar-tracking radar technology given to Ukraine in 2015, was stolen by the separatists not long after delivery.[25] Assuming such a risk with lethal weaponry is needless and should, under present circumstances, be avoided. The advocates of arming Ukraine cite a number of well-intentioned, yet nebulous and, in some cases, erroneous motives for their position. The primary argument is that the United States must support the independence of a democratic, potential future NATO member.[26] The problem with this particular belief is that the United States is and has been supporting the independence of Ukraine for years.[27] Since the outset of the conflict, the United States has provided over $1.3 billion in monetary assistance, training, and non-lethal materiel such as radar, surveillance, and vehicles.[28] As argued above, there is no practical need for the provision of lethal arms, so the support for Ukrainian independence is, in effect, being realized. Another argument for arming Ukraine is that doing so strengthens NATO; however, one can argue persuasively that Ukraine is doing just fine without American anti-tank missiles.[29] In the same vein as the strengthening NATO argument, champions for the arming of Ukraine insist that lethal arms from America will enhance European security. European allies of the United States tend to have a different opinion.[30] Representatives of countries located within Europe, such as the former president of France, Francois Hollande; German Chancellor, Angela Merkel; and U.K. national security official, Mark Sedwell, have publicly stated their qualms with a U.S.-provided lethal arms package, echoing the concerns outlined above.[31] Also coming from within Europe, the European Council on Foreign Relations has published objections to the idea.[32] In a broader sense, current French president Emmanuel Macron has recently called for Europe to achieve greater defense autonomy and rely less on the United States. In his remarks, he suggested a move towards security cooperation with the Russian Federation if the situation in Donbas deescalates.[33] ARMING UKRAINE IS SYMBOLICALLY MORAL, BUT CHANCES AN INCREASE IN HOSTILITIES THAT COULD DEVOLVE INTO A TIT-FOR-TAT PROXY WAR, OR WORSE. There is no rational basis for providing Ukraine with Javelin missile systems, or any other lethalweaponry. Such a move has no positive effect for the Ukrainians on the battlefield. Instead, the United States is undertaking several wholly preventable risks with the prospect of realizing zero strategic ends. The Ukrainian armed forces are capable of sustaining their mission domestically. Arming Ukraine is symbolically moral, but chances an increase in hostilities that could devolve into a tit-for-tat proxy war, or worse. An entirely new U.S. policy towards Ukraine is unnecessary. Rather, the existing policy of supporting Ukraine is in need of amending, which can be achieved by a collaborative approach on the part of Congress and the executive branch. A three-pronged strategy is the best means of modifying the current U.S. strategy. First and foremost, the U.S. must transition from the provision of lethal means, to non-lethal aid paired with an advisory presence focused on countering Russian electronic warfare capabilities. Next, in lieu of any further weapons deals, Congress should author and pass a bill that allocates increased funds to be used in providing Ukraine with non-lethal materiel, surveillance drones, and, most importantly, counter-electronic warfare technology. Finally, Congress should petition the president to authorize not only the aforementioned equipment-provision bill, but also the deployment of additional troops, with a non-combat mandate, to assist the Ukrainian military with training and structural reforms.
ARLINGTON, Va. -- On his visit to Ukraine this week, the American defense secretary, Jim Mattis, confirmed that he favors providing ''defensive weapons'' to the former Soviet republic. According to recent reports, this military aid would involve sending Javelin anti-tank guided missiles to Ukraine, which has been fighting Russian-backed separatists in the eastern Donbass region for more than three years.
The Trump administration has approved the largest U.S. commercial sale of lethal defensive weapons to Ukraine since 2014. The move was heavily supported by top Trump national security Cabinet officials and Congress but may complicate President Trump’s stated ambition to work with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Administration officials confirmed that the State Department this month approved a commercial license authorizing the export of Model M107A1 Sniper Systems, ammunition, and associated parts and accessories to Ukraine, a sale valued at $41.5 million. These weapons address a specific vulnerability of Ukrainian forces fighting a Russian-backed separatist movement in two eastern provinces. There has been no approval to export the heavier weapons the Ukrainian government is asking for, such as Javelin antitank missiles. Congress authorized such sales in 2014 in the Ukraine Freedom Support Act, but the Obama administration never authorized large commercial or government sales, a move widely seen as a de facto decision not to provide lethal weapons to the Ukraine military. Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), who co-sponsored the law, praised the Trump administration’s move. “I’m pleased the administration approved the sale of defensive lethal arms to Ukraine,” Corker told me. “This decision was supported by Congress in legislation that became law three years ago and reflects our country’s longstanding commitment to Ukraine in the face of ongoing Russian aggression.” A State Department spokesperson, speaking on background, said that although the United States has now licensed the commercial export of lethal weapons to Ukraine, the U.S. government has not sold or given weapons directly to Ukraine. There’s never been any official policy on such sales one way or another, the spokesperson said, adding that this license was granted on a case-by-case basis. There were licenses granted for small commercial sales of small arms to Ukraine before this year Another senior Trump administration official said that Trump personally approved the decision to allow the issuing of the license after being presented a decision memo by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. While there was never a formal ban on such weapons transfers, the decision was discussed internally as a lifting of the de facto Obama administration restrictions, the official said. As I reported in October, the decision over whether to allow lethal arms sales to Ukraine had been sitting on Trump’s desk for months. The National Security Council’s Principals Committee, which includes Cabinet members, met months ago and provided several options to the president. Experts and officials said Trump’s chosen option was measured; he didn’t approve everything the Ukrainians asked for but nonetheless crossed the line of approving lethal sales, a significant shift in his administration’s approach and U.S. policy overall. “We have crossed the Rubicon, this is lethal weapons and I predict more will be coming,” said one senior congressional official. It’s likely no mere coincidence that Canada also approved lethal defense sales to Ukraine this week, which would happen only if the Canadian government knew the United States was on board, the official said. The Trump administration notified leading congressional committees of the sale on Dec. 13 but didn’t make any public announcements, which some say reflects the sensitivity of the decision and concern about how it will be received by Trump supporters who long opposed the move, as well as by Putin. “The way it was not rolled out tells you something, that they are concerned about the perception of this. They are not trumpeting this as a major policy shift or signature policy priority,” said Samuel Charap, senior political scientist at the Rand Corporation. The administration’s strategy of approving very limited arms sales is akin to a “Goldilocks” approach, he said, because it attempts to satisfy advocates while not sparking negative reaction by those who fear such a move could risk escalating the crisis. One senior administration official who previously warned of this very risk is Fiona Hill, now the senior National Security Council director for Russia. She argued in a 2015 Post op-ed that if the United States arms Ukraine, “the Ukrainians won’t be the only ones caught in an escalating military conflict with Russia.” It’s unclear whether Hill still holds that view, but other top Trump officials have been clear they support sending lethal arms to Ukraine. Mattis said in Kiev in August that “defensive weapons are not provocative unless you are an aggressor, and clearly Ukraine is not an aggressor.” Tillerson declared his support in his Senate confirmation hearing. Tillerson’s part-time special envoy on the Ukraine crisis, former U.S. ambassador to NATO Kurt Volker, told me last month he also supports providing lethal weapons to Ukraine. Volker is working with Moscow to revive a peace plan known as Minsk2, but progress is scarce. According to Volker, Russia has not fulfilled any of its obligations, which include removing its unacknowledged troops and heavy weapons from Ukrainian territory. His argument is that the costs of Russia’s intervention should increase, making Putin choose whether to bear that burden or strike a deal. Others, including Mattis, see the sales as a principled signal that the United States will support its allies. They say Ukraine is simply defending its own territory and therefore lethal weapons shouldn’t be seen as a provocation. Meanwhile, the fighting in Russian-occupied eastern Ukraine is heating up. According to a BBC report this week, Moscow is pulling all of its personnel from a Russian-Ukrainian joint center that is meant to monitor a frequently violated truce. Trump himself has consistently stated his desire to work with Putin to resolve the Ukraine crisis, dating back to his presidential campaign. During the 2016 GOP convention, the Trump campaign beat back efforts to have the Republican platform endorse lethal assistance to Ukraine. Trump campaign officials pushed to soften a proposed amendment to remove the language “lethal defensive weapons” and replace it with “appropriate assistance.” Trump has now decided that lethal defensive weapons constitute “appropriate assistance.” His decision to approve small amounts of weapons sales likely won’t fundamentally change Putin’s calculus or the trajectory of the war in Ukraine. But it’s one sure sign that Trump’s foreign policy views are evolving — or at least being influenced — as his presidency progresses.
The recent clash between Russian and Ukrainian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait has generated a flurry of alarm. NATO was compelled to call an emergency meeting with Ukraine and the UN Security Council convened an urgent session to discuss the crisis. Exercising their usual tendency to oversimplify murky geopolitical rivalries, Western officials and journalists embraced the knee-jerk narrative that the incident is yet another case of Vladimir Putin’s blatant aggression and “outlaw behavior” against its peace-loving, democratic neighbor. Right on cue, CNN, MSNBC, and other media outlets dispatched stridently anti-Russian editorials masquerading as news stories. In reality, the Kerch Strait incident involves a complex mixture of factors. They include the tense Russian-Ukrainian bilateral relationship, Kiev’s broader foreign policy objectives, and Ukraine’s volatile domestic politics. Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko had to know that a decision to send three naval vessels through the Kerch Strait would be disruptive. The strait, which connects the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, separates Russia’s Taman Peninsula from the Crimea Peninsula. Despite Moscow’s annexation of the latter in 2014, Kiev still considers Crimea to be Ukrainian territory, a position that the United States and its allies back emphatically. Moreover, passage through the strait is the only oceanic link between Ukraine’s Black Sea ports and those on the Azov. Kiev, not surprisingly, views the strait as international waters. Russia, however, regards the waterway as its own territorial waters and viewed the attempted transit by the three Ukrainian ships as a violation. Whatever the legal merits of the competing positions regarding sovereignty over Crimea and the status of the Kerch Strait, the reality is that Russia controls that peninsula and is unlikely to ever restore it to Ukraine, despite Western demands. Poroshenko had to know that his attempt to send warships through a narrow passage between what the Kremlin insists are two portions of Russian territory was certain to cause an incident. Why did Kiev risk (if not avidly seek) such a confrontation? And why now? There are several likely motives. Kiev wants to increase pressure on NATO, and especially the United States, to take a harder stance against Moscow. Despite their official position that the Kremlin must disgorge Crimea and end support for pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine, Western policy looks increasingly stale and ineffectual. Some European officials even muse that it may be time to reconsider (weaken) the economic sanctions that the West imposed on Russia. President Trump has stated that Russia should be re-admitted to the G-7 group of leading economic powers. Such talk is potentially quite threatening to Ukraine’s interests. Creating an incident that reminds Kiev’s Western supporters (and the rest of the world) of Moscow’s aggressive tendencies makes any prospect of even a limited rapprochement between Russia and either NATO or the European Union less likely. Ukrainian leaders are especially determined to nurture greater bilateral strategic cooperation with the United States. The notion that the Trump administration has pursued a “soft” policy toward Russia, much less one that amounts to appeasement, has always been overstated. Trump’s initiatives are actually more hardline than those Barack Obama’s administration embraced. That is especially true regarding Washington’s relationship with Kiev. Whereas Obama consistently refused to provide weapons to Ukraine, the Trump administration has approved two major arms sales, one of which included sophisticated anti-tank missiles. U.S. troops have participated in joint military exercises with Ukrainian forces, and Secretary of Defense James Mattis concedes that the United States is training Ukrainian units at a base in western Ukraine. Poroshenko and his associates want to encourage and intensify those trends. They hope that creating a new incident underscoring aggressive Russian conduct will lead the Trump administration to boost arms sales and other forms of bilateral military cooperation. Even if Trump proved reluctant to adopt that course, domestic and international pressure might leave him little choice. Indeed, Western news media outlets excoriated Trump for not immediately condemning Russia as an outright aggressor in the Kerch Strait incident. Poroshenko thus has ample foreign policy reasons for taking the actions he did in the Kerch Strait. He also has significant political and ideological incentives. His government did not announce the official date for Ukraine’s 2019 presidential election until two days following the naval clash; it is now set for March 31. To say that the timing of the announcement was suspicious is an understatement. No candidate in the extremely crowded field is likely to exceed the 50 percent mark needed to avoid a runoff, but recent surveys have indicated that Poroshenko is in surprisingly poor political shape. Most polls showed him receiving between 8 and 15 percent of the first-round vote. The leading candidate is former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko, with Poroshenko running in third. Corruption scandals continue to bedevil his administration, making his re-election (or even his ability to make the runoff) far from certain. In addition to creating a “rally around the flag” effect, thereby boosting Poroshenko’s status, Russian seizure of the Ukrainian vessels gave the president a justification to impose outright martial law in 10 regions of eastern Ukraine-areas likely to be especially hostile to his political prospects. It could also serve as a basis for tightening Ukraine’s already worrisome restrictions on freedom of expression. That track record should trouble Kiev’s backers in the West. To wage war against eastern separatists, Kiev early on not only instituted military conscription, it arrested critics of that action. Authorities jailed television journalist and blogger Ruslan Kotsaba and charged him with treason for making a video denouncing the conscription law. Kotsaba become Amnesty International’s first “prisoner of conscience” in Ukraine since the 2014 so-called Maidan revolution. The vagueness of the applicable laws (and the absence of any meaningful independent review or right of appeal) has been especially alarming. Indeed, it seems that anyone who disputes the government’s account of the Maidan revolution (especially those who dare to mention the role of ultranationalist, neo-fascist elements) or the conflict in eastern Ukraine is likely to be silenced. Bogdan Ovcharuk, a spokesperson for Amnesty International’s Kiev office, expressed the concerns of many proponents of freedom of expression when he told the BBC: “This is a very slippery slope indeed. It’s one thing to restrict access to texts advocating violence, but in general banning books because their authors have views deemed unacceptable to politicians in Kiev…is deeply dangerous.” The consequences of such a campaign, he warned, were certain to damage the fabric of liberty. Yet the Kiev government’s restrictive policies continue unabated. In September 2015, Ukrainian authorities issued an order banning 34 journalists and seven bloggers from even entering the country. The Committee to Protect Journalists reported that the newly publicized list was merely part of a larger blacklist that contained the names of 388 individuals and more than a hundred organizations that were barred from entry on the grounds of “national security” and allegedly posing a threat to Ukraine’s “territorial integrity.” Human Rights Watch criticized the Kiev government in September 2017 for imposing yet more restrictions on journalists, especially foreign correspondents. The Poroshenko government even pushed through legislation barring criticism of Ukraine’s past, including the role that ultra-nationalist guerilla leader (and Nazi collaborator) Stepan Bandera and his followers played in World War II. Censorship provisions and other media restrictions may become even more widespread and arbitrary with Poroshenko’s new declaration of martial law. Ukraine’s Western admirers typically ignore such evidence of authoritarian conduct, since it does not fit with their portrayal of the country as an enlightened member of the democratic community. The reality is that Ukraine epitomizes what CNN analyst Fareed Zakaria has aptly described as an “illiberal democracy.” The Poroshenko regime certainly does not warrant unquestioned Western backing. Kiev is not above engaging in provocations to serve either its political leadership’s domestic agenda or its foreign policy objectives. The United States does not have vital strategic or moral interests at stake in the overall Ukraine-Russia quarrel, much less the latest parochial spat in the Kerch Strait. A cautious, restrained posture is appropriate.
The last several days have seen the once dormant debate—whether or not the U.S. should start supplying weapons to Ukraine—reignite. The debate was revived by the release of a joint report by a group of ex-U.S. officials affiliated with three prominent American think tanks, which recommended that Washington urgently supply anti-tank missiles, counter-battery radars, and other military hardware to the Ukrainian armed forces so that the latter can deter Russia from escalating the conflict in Donbass. I don’t dispute that the Ukrainian army would become stronger if the U.S. delivers the recommended weapons. But the truth is, these weapons would not end the conflict. Moreover, these deliveries may actually prompt Russia to increase its involvement in the conflict, dragging the U.S. into a vicious cycle of escalating commitments. Chances that the U.S. would prevail in such an escalation are quite low. Whatever U.S. authorities would be realistically willing to do to help Ukraine militarily can be matched, if not exceeded, by Russia, which is much more interested in the outcome of the current stand-off and has resources on the ground. In addition to escalating in Ukraine, Russia could also respond to the U.S. arming of Ukraine by adopting a more aggressive posture vis-à-vis the U.S. in the realm of strategic nuclear deterrence, as well as acting as a spoiler to undermine U.S. vital interests in such spheres as countering proliferation of nuclear weapons and managing China’s rise. Even some of Putin’s critics in Western Europe admit that the consequences of arming Ukraine will not be limited to the conflict there. “It could lead to a nuclear war,” Polish statesman Lech Walesa said last year when asked whether the Europeans should send weapons to Ukrainians. The report now argues that a better-armed Ukrainian army would be able to inflict greater casualties on Russian “volunteers” in Ukraine and that prospects of such casualties should help to deter Russia. Not really. Yes, Vladimir Putin remains sensitive to casualties among active-duty Russian personnel in the conflict, but only as long as he maintains that Russia is not a party to the conflict. The delivery of U.S. arms could give Putin a pretext to either order a preemptive strike to destroy the delivered weapons, or even to send troops to Ukraine openly in order to accomplish what the Kremlin would describe as a just cause of protecting ethnic Russian compatriots from the Ukrainian army that the Russian president has already described as a “NATO legion.” Once (and if) the Russian army gets officially involved in the conflict, the Russian population will become more tolerant toward casualties, and so will Putin. The experience of the second Chechen war shows that while the Russian public’s tolerance for casualties is not limitless, it can be quite high as long the Russians believe their army is fighting to defend the country’s interests and stands a fair chance of prevailing in the conflict. That the Russian army will be able to win the military phase of the conflict in Ukraine with relative ease is clear from Ukrainian commanders’ own confessions that they took a beating when Russian regular forces allegedly moved in. Ukraine will be destroyed militarily if the West supplies weapons to Kiev, according to an article penned by a member of Russia’s Security Council Advisory Board for the next issue of the Russia in Global Affairs journal.
Whatever the legal merits of the competing positions regarding sovereignty over Crimea and the status of the Kerch Strait, the reality is that Russia controls that peninsula and is unlikely to ever restore it to Ukraine, despite Western demands. Poroshenko had to know that his attempt to send warships through a narrow passage between what the Kremlin insists are two portions of Russian territory was certain to cause an incident. Why did Kiev risk (if not avidly seek) such a confrontation? And why now? There are several likely motives. Kiev wants to increase pressure on NATO, and especially the United States, to take a harder stance against Moscow. Despite their official position that the Kremlin must disgorge Crimea and end support for pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine, Western policy looks increasingly stale and ineffectual. Some European officials even muse that it may be time to reconsider (weaken) the economic sanctions that the West imposed on Russia. President Trump has stated that Russia should be re-admitted to the G-7 group of leading economic powers. Such talk is potentially quite threatening to Ukraine’s interests. Creating an incident that reminds Kiev’s Western supporters (and the rest of the world) of Moscow’s aggressive tendencies makes any prospect of even a limited rapprochement between Russia and either NATO or the European Union less likely. Ukrainian leaders are especially determined to nurture greater bilateral strategic cooperation with the United States. The notion that the Trump administration has pursued a “soft” policy toward Russia, much less one that amounts to appeasement, has always been overstated. Trump’s initiatives are actually more hardline than those Barack Obama’s administration embraced. That is especially true regarding Washington’s relationship with Kiev. Whereas Obama consistently refused to provide weapons to Ukraine, the Trump administration has approved two major arms sales, one of which included sophisticated anti-tank missiles. U.S. troops have participated in joint military exercises with Ukrainian forces, and Secretary of Defense James Mattis concedes that the United States is training Ukrainian units at a base in western Ukraine. Poroshenko and his associates want to encourage and intensify those trends. They hope that creating a new incident underscoring aggressive Russian conduct will lead the Trump administration to boost arms sales and other forms of bilateral military cooperation. Even if Trump proved reluctant to adopt that course, domestic and international pressure might leave him little choice. Indeed, Western news media outlets excoriated Trump for not immediately condemning Russia as an outright aggressor in the Kerch Strait incident.
George Szamuely is a Hungarian-born scholar and Senior Research Fellow at London’s Global Policy Institute. He lives in New York City. I spoke to him about escalating hostilities on Russia’s Ukrainian and Black Sea borders and about Exercise Trident Juncture, NATO’s massive military exercise on Russian borders which ended just as the latest hostilities began. Ann Garrison: George, the hostilities between Ukraine, NATO, and Russia continue to escalate in the Sea of Azov, the Kerch Strait, and the Black Sea. What do you think the latest odds of a shooting war between NATO and Russia are, if one hasn’t started by the time this is published? George Szamuely: Several weeks ago, when we first talked about this, I said 60 percent. Now I’d say, maybe 70 percent. The problem is that Trump seems determined to be the anti-Obama. Obama, in Trump’s telling, “allowed” Russia to take Crimea and to “invade” Ukraine. Therefore, it will be up to Trump to reverse this. Just as he, Trump, reversed Obama’s policy on Iran by walking away from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, otherwise known as the Iran nuclear deal. So expect ever-increasing US involvement in Ukraine. AG: NATO’s Supreme Commander US General Curtis M. Scaparrotti is reported to have been on the phone with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko “offering his full support.” Thoughts on that? GS: There has been a proxy war within Ukraine since 2014, with NATO backing Poroshenko’s Ukrainian government and Russia backing the dissidents and armed separatists who speak Russian and identify as Russian in Ukraine’s southeastern Donbass region. But in the Kerch Strait the hostilities are between Russia and Ukraine, with NATO behind Ukraine. A shooting war will begin if it escalates to where NATO soldiers shoot and kill Russian soldiers or vice versa. Whoever shoots first, the other side will feel compelled to respond, and then there’ll be a war between Russia and NATO or Russia and a NATO nation. We don’t know whether NATO would feel compelled to respond as one if Russians fired on soldiers of individual NATO nations—most likely UK soldiers since the UK is sending more of its Special Forces and already has the largest NATO military presence in Ukraine. Russia could defeat the UK, but if the US gets involved, all bets are off. Szamuely: U.S. ready to fight to last Brit. AG: It’s hard to imagine that the US would allow Russia to defeat the UK. GS: It is, but on the other hand, the US is the US and the UK is the UK. The United States might well be ready to fight to the last Brit, much as the United States is definitely ready to fight to the last Ukrainian. There are already 300 US paratroopers in Ukraine training Ukrainians, but the British would be well advised that words of encouragement from Washington don’t necessarily translate into US willingness to go to war. AG: The US Congress passed a law that US troops can’t serve under any foreign command, so that would require US command. GS: Yes, and without that, any British military defeat could be blamed on traditional British military incompetence rather than US weakness or foolish braggadocio. AG: This latest dustup between the Russian and Ukrainian navies took place in the Kerch Strait. I had to study several maps to understand this, but basically neither Russian nor Ukrainian vessels, military or commercial, can get to or from the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea without passing through the Kerch Strait. That doesn’t mean that neither could get to the Black Sea, because both have Black Sea borders, but they couldn’t get from ports in the Sea of Azov to the Black Sea and back. And neither Ukraine nor Russia can get from the Black Sea to Western European waters without passing through the Bosporous and Dardanelles Straits in Turkey to the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, and then further to the Atlantic Ocean through the Strait of Gibraltar, which is bordered on one side by Spain and the British territory of Gibraltar, and on the other by Morocco and the Spanish territory Ceuta. So there are many geo-strategic choke points where Russian ships, naval or commercial, could be stopped by NATO nations or their allies, and Ukraine has already asked Turkey to stop them from passing through the Bosporus Strait. Thoughts on that? GS: Well, of course Ukraine can ask for anything it likes. There’s no way in the world Turkey would try to stop Russian ships going through the Bosporus Strait. That would be a violation of the 1936 Montreux Convention and an act of war on the part of Turkey. It isn’t going to happen. As for the Kerch Strait, it is Russian territorial water. Ukraine is free to use it and has been doing so without incident since 2014. The only thing the Russians insist on is that any ship going through the strait use a Russian pilot. During the recent incident, the Ukrainian tug refused to use a Russian pilot. The Russians became suspicious, fearing that the Ukrainians were engaged in a sabotage mission to blow up the newly constructed bridge across the strait. You’ll remember that an American columnist not so long ago urged the Ukrainian authorities to blow up the bridge. That’s why the Russians accuse Kiev of staging a provocation. AG: There’s a longstanding back channel between the White House and the Kremlin, as satirized in Dr. Strangelove. Anti-Trump fanatics keep claiming this is new and traitorous, but it’s long established. Obama and Putin used it to keep Russian and US soldiers from firing on one another instead of the jihadists both claimed to be fighting in Syria. Kennedy and Khrushchev used it to keep the Bay of Pigs crisis from escalating into a nuclear war. Shouldn’t Trump and Putin be talking on that back channel now, no matter how much it upsets CNN and MSNBC? GS: Well, of course, they should. The danger is that in this atmosphere of anti-Russian hysteria such channels for dialogue may not be kept open. As a result, crises could escalate beyond the point at which either side could back down without losing face. What’s terrifying is that so many US politicians and press now describe any kind of negotiation, dialogue, or threat-management as treasonous collusion by Donald Trump. Remember Trump’s first bombing in Syria in April 2017. Before he launched that attack, Trump administration officials gave advance warning to the Russians to enable them to get any Russian aircraft out of harm’s way. This perfectly sensible action on the part of the administration—leave aside the illegality and stupidity of the attack—was greeted by Hillary Clinton and the MSNBC crowd as evidence that the whole operation was cooked up by Trump and Putin to take attention off Russia-gate. It’s nuts. AG: Most of us have heard Russia and NATO’s conflicting accounts of why the Russian Navy seized several Ukrainian vessels in the Sea of Azov. What’s your interpretation of what happened? Poroshenko: Provocation with elections near? GS: As I said, I think the Russians had every right to be suspicious of the intent of the Ukrainian vessels. The Ukrainians know that these are Russian territorial waters. They know that the only way to go through the Kerch Strait is by making use of a Russian pilot. They refused to allow the Russians to pilot the ships through the strait. Whatever the Ukrainians’ ultimate intent was—whether it was to carry out an act of sabotage, to provoke the Russians into overreaction and then to demand help from NATO, or simply to go through the strait without a Russian pilot in order to enable President Poroshenko to proclaim the strait as non-Russian—whatever Kiev’s intent was, the Russians were entitled to respond. The force the Russians used was hardly excessive. In similar circumstances, the US would have destroyed all of the ships and killed everyone on board. Recall, incidentally, Israel has seized Gaza flotilla boats and arrested everyone on board. In 2010, the Israeli Navy shot nine activists dead during a flotilla boat seizure, and wounded one who died after four years in a coma. AG: Don’t the US, Ukraine, and the UN Security Council refuse to recognize the Kerch Strait as Russian territory, and insist that Russia’s claim to it violates various maritime treaties? I know the UNSC refuses to recognize the Golan Heights as Israeli territory, not that that does Syria any good. GS: According to the 2003 agreement, Russia and Ukraine agreed to consider the strait as well as the Sea of Azov as shared territorial waters. From 2014 on, Russia considered the strait as Russian waters, though it’s made no attempt to hamper Ukrainian shipping. The Azov Sea is still shared by Russia and Ukraine. During the recent incident, the Ukrainian Navy acted provocatively, deliberately challenging the Russians. As for what the UNSC accepts, how would NATO respond if Serbia entered Kosovo on some pretext or other? AG: OK, now let’s go back to NATO’s Exercise Trident Juncture, a massive military exercise on Russia’s Scandinavian and Arctic borders that concluded on November 24, one day before the Kerch Strait incident. The first phase was deployment, from August to October. The second phase was war games from October 25th to November 7th. The war games were based on the premise that Russia had invaded Scandinavia by ground, air, and sea. They included 50,000 participants from 31 NATO and partner countries, 250 aircraft, 65 naval vessels, and up to 10,000 tanks and other ground vehicles, and I hate to think about how much fossil fuel they burned. The final phase was a command post exercise to make sure that, should NATO forces ever face a real Russian invasion of Scandinavia, their response could be safely coordinated in Norway and in Italy, far from the war zone. So George, do Scandinavians have reason to worry that Russia might invade any of their respective nations? GS: Not at all. This is ridiculous. It was the largest military exercise since the end of the Cold War, and why? Why did they do this? Russia isn’t threatening Scandinavia, but it’s more likely that it will if NATO continues conducting war games on its borders. Right now tension between East and West is escalating so fast that a single event could be like a match that triggers an explosion, and then there’ll be a war. Stranger than Strangelove. AG: There was a recent Russian exercise, or joint Russian and Chinese exercise, based on the premise that the US had invaded Korea, right? GS: Right. But it wasn’t anywhere near Europe, so it wasn’t threatening the Europeans. It took place in eastern Siberia, so it shouldn’t have caused panic in NATO countries. It shouldn’t have caused panic in the US either, because the Pacific Ocean separates the US and the Korean Peninsula. What’s striking about Trident Juncture is that it involved Sweden and Finland, both of whom are traditionally neutral. They were neutral during the Cold War, not joining any alliances. Finlandization came to mean a foreign policy that in no way challenged or antagonized the USSR. So now here’s Finland rolling back that policy and joining NATO in this massive military exercise to stop nonexistent Russian aggression. AG: Has Russia ever attempted to seize territory outside its own borders since the end of the Cold War? GS: No. Russia never attempted to seize territory outside its own borders. The case cited by the West is Crimea, but that was really an outstanding issue that should have been addressed during the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Boris Yeltsin, the drunken, incompetent stooge that the US installed, just neglected it. The Russian-speaking and Russian-identified people of Crimea were unhappy about Ukraine claiming sovereignty over them. They had been an autonomous republic within the USSR, and after its dissolution, they still retained their constitutional autonomy. That’s what gave them the right to hold a referendum to join the Russia Federation in 2014. If the West is involved in an uprising, as in Ukraine, it recognizes the “independence” of the government it puts in power. It won’t recognize the constitutional autonomy of Crimea, which predated the 2014 Ukrainian revolution or illegal armed coup, whichever you call it, because it wasn’t part of their plan. AG: The NATO nations and their allies say that Russia invaded and occupied Crimea, violating Ukrainian sovereignty according to international law. Democracy Now’s Amy Goodman referred to the “illegal annexation” of Crimea at least three times after the Kerch Strait incident. How do you explain the presence of Russian soldiers in Crimea prior to the referendum? GS: They didn’t invade and occupy Crimea. Their forces were there legally, according to a 25-year lease agreement between Russia and Ukraine. Crimea had been a part of Russia for more than 200 years. For most of the time, during the USSR era, it was an autonomous republic within the Russian Federation. In 1954, Khrushchev transferred some degree of sovereignty over the Crimean Republic to Ukraine. I’m not entirely sure why he did that, but the issue wasn’t that important then because Ukraine, Russia and Crimea were all part of the USSR. Khrushchev didn’t envisage an independent Ukraine walking off with such a prize piece of real estate. Crimea is not only a huge tourist destination, it is also the site of Russia’s primary naval base on the Black Sea in Sevastopol. Yeltsin failed to address the problem in 1991. Since then, every time Crimeans talked about holding a referendum on their future, Kiev threatened to use force to stop them. Kiev would have used force again in 2014 if the Russians in the Port of Sevastopol had not left their Crimean base and made their presence known. AG: The US, aka NATO, has an empire of military bases all over the world, and troops right up against Russia’s borders as in Exercise Trident Juncture. Does Russia have anything remotely like it? NATO practices war with Russia. Exercise Trident Juncture. (Master-Corporal Jonathan Barrette, Canadian Forces Combat Camera) GS: No. Russia does not have military bases outside its borders, which are now more or less as they were in 1939, when the USSR was surrounded by hostile states that were more than happy to join Hitler. So it’s ridiculous to tell Russia, “Don’t worry about our troops and war games all over your borders because we don’t really mean any harm.” Washington is calling Russia an existential enemy, and the UK is promising to stand shoulder to shoulder with its NATO allies and partners against “Russian aggression,” which is really Russian defense. So now we have an explosive situation on the Ukrainian and Russian borders that could easily turn into a shooting war. AG: I read some US/NATO complaints that Russia was conducting exercises on its own side of the border. And last week NATO accused the Russian military of jamming its signals during its rehearsal for a war on Russia’s borders. GS: Yes, that’s what the US considers Russian aggression, even though its troops and bases are all over the world and all over Russia’s borders. AG: Competition between US and Russian energy corporations is one of the main undercurrents to all this. The US State Department even said that Europe should abandon the Nord Stream-2 gas pipeline project with Russia because of the Kerch Strait incident, but that received a cool response, particularly from Angela Merkel. What are your thoughts about that? GS: Well, obviously, the Trump administration is determined to push the Europeans to give up on natural gas from Russia and to opt, instead, for US liquefied natural gas (LNG). The problem is that LNG shipped across the Atlantic is much more expensive than natural gas piped to Europe from Russia. So it’s clearly not in the interests of the Europeans to have a bigger energy bill. Look what’s happening in France. Ordinary people are not making so much money that they can afford to shell out more for energy, particularly when there is no need to do so. Some countries such as Poland are so imbued with hostility toward Russia that they’re willing to pay more for gas just to hurt Russia, but Germany won’t go down this path. AG: Anything else you’d like to say for now? GS: Yes, I think it’s amazing that this many years after the Cold War we’ve reached a point where there’s almost no public criticism of a policy that has led to the US abandoning a major arms control agreement, namely the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty signed in 1987. There’s almost no public criticism of the US getting involved in an armed confrontation on Russia’s doorstep, in Ukraine, Syria, Iran, or conceivably even Scandinavia. There’s almost no public criticism of roping formerly neutral European powers like Sweden and Finland into NATO military exercises. Given the fact that the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty that went into effect in 2011 will expire in 2021, and given that there’s nothing on the horizon to take its place, this is an extraordinarily perilous point in time. And much of this has to be blamed on the liberals. The liberals have embraced an anti-Russian agenda. The kind of liberal view that prevailed during the Cold War was that we should at least pursue arms control agreements. We might not like the Communists, but we need treaties to prevent a nuclear war. Now there’s no such caution. Any belligerence towards Russia is now good and justified. There’s next to no pushback against getting into a war with Russia, even though it could go nuclear.
While parliament fiddles, Europe burns, or at least sputters into flame. History could not be clearer. The diversion of the Russo-Ukrainian conflict into the Sea of Azov is precisely the kind of escalation that has preceded Europe’s past cataclysms. A great power treats a little one with contempt. A little one responds with violence, expecting friends to come to its aid, diplomatically, economically, then militarily. Ukraine president proposes martial law after Russia seizes ships Read more For four years, Ukraine has disobeyed the old pragmatism that if you share a border with a powerful dictator, you behave with extreme caution. Kiev’s anti-communists flirted with Nato – with the US’s encouragement – at a time when Georgia was also flirting and the Baltic states had already joined. Vladimir Putin echoed Yeltsin, that Russia would “take this as a direct threat to the security of our country”. When Ukraine elected a pro-western leadership in 2014, Moscow supported an uprising in its Russian-speaking eastern provinces. There followed Moscow’s invasion of Ukrainian Crimea, and now a tightening of the noose on Ukraine’s eastern ports. Ten thousand Ukrainians have already died in this secret war. It is classic escalation. Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, is accused of hanging tough as he faces defeat in forthcoming elections. On Sunday he appealed to “Ukraine’s allies to stand united” against Russia. He did not specify who they were, or what they should do. After the invasion of Crimea, a ragbag of trade, financial and travel sanctions were imposed on Moscow by western powers. As usual, such feel-good weapons had no effect beyond counter-productivity. 1:16 Russia seizes Ukrainian naval ships in major escalation of tensions – video Sanctions cemented Putin more closely in power and to his cronies. They encouraged him to ever greater mischief, backing Russian minorities in bordering states and cyber-meddling in western elections. The thesis that impoverishment would somehow force him to cease from, as he sees it, restoring Russia’s pride was absurd. Dictatorship loves poverty. Sanctions merely fuelled Donald Trump’s casual remark last year that Nato was “obsolete”. Sign up for the Guardian Opinion email Read more What is glaring is that Europe now lacks any collective forum in which such escalations can be discussed and possibly resolved. The end of the cold war was not followed by any revision to Yalta or Potsdam. There was no new treaty with Russia. Its attempted military encirclement by Nato was as reckless as London’s welcome to Moscow’s massed oligarch and kleptocrats. History may yet regard the handling of a defeated and depressed Russia in the 1990s as like its handling of Germany after 1918. Eastern Europe is now a tinderbox of competing populisms, full of talk of Putin only understanding violence, of dodgy alliances and half-meant security promises. There is no leader, no overseer, no plausible guarantor of peace. The only promise is of anarchy. And do you know what Britain’s parliament was discussing all this time … ?
No one wants war, but this is how one gets a war. Two angry states are poking and probing at the flammable edges of an extended war zone, each acting in what it believes is a controlled fashion with little risk of escalation, but each ready to risk the next step if the price of retreat seems too high. Here begins the chain of actions and reactions coupled with miscalculations leading to a conflagration neither wants or expects. The violent incident on the approach to the Kerch Strait is not how many in the West envisage the path to war in Europe. That path is different from Russia using stealth to take a bite out of the Baltic states. It is also not Moscow heating up the war in Donbas before launching an assault on all of eastern Ukraine or conquering a land bridge from Donbas to Crimea. Nor was it Russia using a snap exercise to disguise an attack on a soft portion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s defenses. Instead, the Kerch Strait crisis depicts a more realistic path to tragedy. Russia’s 2014 seizure of Crimea was rightly seen as a serious violation of international norms, but few at the time recognized it as creating new tinder for war—other than maybe out of a long-term smoldering Ukrainian revanchism. But Crimea under Russian control, when Russian-Ukrainian relations are so inflamed, is producing a potentially dramatic security problem. The base for a conflict that flies out of control often resides less in early actions, however alarming, but in the stakes inspiring them—and, in this case, the stakes are high. For Ukraine, Russia’s claim to sovereignty over Crimea comes with an asserted right to control Ukraine’s access to and use of the Sea of Azov. This includes a potential Russian stranglehold over the port of Mariupol, from which flows steel and iron constituting 40 percent of Ukraine’s annual export revenue and a large portion of its grain exports. Additionally, the livelihood of 10,000 fishermen is at stake. Moscow, on the other hand, rather like China in the South China Sea, appears determined to turn the Sea of Azov into a strategic internal rampart, and the Kerch Strait—with a new $7.5 billion bridge over it—constitutes the linchpin of this plan. Over much of 2018 the Russians have grown more aggressive in asserting control over the flow of traffic through the Strait, and the Ukrainians more determined to assert their right of free passage based on the 2003 Russian-Ukrainian Treaty on the Use of the Sea of Azov and Kerch Strait. Such was the claim of the Ukrainian naval commander last Sunday when told to turn back. The Russians countered by insisting that under Article 25 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) they have a right to temporarily suspend “innocent passage” of foreign ships “if such suspension is essential for the protection of [their country’s] security.” Both claims are rather beside the point. No matter what the status of the 2003 agreement or the force of Russia’s asserted sovereignty over the Kerch Strait, under the UNCLOS, Ukraine has the right of “transit passage” including its warships, in peace and war. Russia’s closing the Strait on security grounds under Article 25 of UNCLOS and then its use of lethal force, even after firing a warning shot and barely justified under Article 30 of the Convention, underscore how little international law matters to the peril now taking dangerous form. For Russia will not, whether out of security concerns or ambition, stop tightening the noose the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait represent for Ukraine. And Ukraine will not cease struggling to cut it. If doing that means seizing the tactical advantage elsewhere, such as escalating the military confrontation in Donbas, the speed with which Ukraine’s leadership declared martial law and placed its military forces on alert this past weekend provides more than a hint. Or, if the next flare-up over control of the waterways between Russia and Ukraine occurs at the same time conflict in eastern Ukraine has heated up, the spark for large-scale conflict will be instant. Short of that, the lengthening delays from hours to days that Russia now imposes on shipping to the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk constitute an economic embargo. But were Russia, at a moment of heightened tensions, to cut off all shipping to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov that would turn an embargo into a blockade, and a blockade is an act of war. Whatever the nature or scale of what will inevitably be the next faceoff between the two countries, the tendency of each side to read any action by the other as a prelude to a massive escalation creates pressure for one or both to react in outsized fashion. Add to this mix the reflexive response of many in the U.S. Congress and media by calling for Washington to beef up its naval presence in the Black Sea and expand lethal arms supplies to Ukraine, and the pathways to a Ukrainian-Russian war turned regional or global take shape. At a minimum, these events should remind everyone that the small-minded and lethargic approach that now characterizes all players’ approach to the Donbas impasse is not as tolerable or risk-free as they appear to believe. Rather these events should open their eyes to the other dimensions of the Ukrainian-Russian standoff whose implications are starker and grimmer. And they should encourage leaders not only in Moscow and Kyiv but in Washington and European capitals to open their history books.
Further escalation of Russia's aggressive actions against Ukraine to the level of a full-scale war is no longer unrealistic due to the concentration of a large group of armed forces near the Ukrainian border. As reported by Censor.NET citing Interfax-Ukraine, this was stated by Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko during the UN General Assembly debates "The situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine" on Wednesday in New York. Read more: Russia's mercenaries committed 13 attacks yesterday: one JFO soldier deadly wounded "Military experts unequivocally determine that an armed group on the Ukraine-Russia border is an offensive strike group. This has nothing to do with defence. They are intended for a military strike. Russia is preparing for this. Therefore, further escalation to the level of a full-scale war is no longer an unrealistic prospect", - said Poroshenko. Like Turchynov: Russia prepares for large-scale continental war Ukraine's president urges government to prepare consolidated claim against Russia over military aggression Russia pulls in troops for large-scale ground war: 260,000 military personnel, 3,500 tanks, 11,000 armored vehicles at Ukraine’s border, - Turchynov Ukraine's ambassador to UN: Russia's hybrid campaign against Ukraine turns into global hybrid war UNGA backs resolution calling to stop Russia's occupation, militarization of Crimea Source: https://censor.net.ua/en/n3112838
Russia is in a state of “mobilization,” having enhanced its readiness to respond to emergencies in an “arc of crisis” around its borders, from the Baltic states to Ukraine and the Black Sea to the Caucuses. Whether it is primarily driven by revanchist imperial power ambitions, by a desire to rebuild its domination of the “near abroad,” or is defensively fending off the expansion of the Euro-Atlantic world into its orbit, it accepts security competition with the United States as a fact of life. Moscow fears that the superpower sponsors subversion and “color” revolutions—externally sponsored mass uprisings to overthrow governments—along its frontiers and within its capital. Ominously, it regards major war as a strong possibility. In March 2018, Russia used a chemical weapon on the soil of the most senior American ally, the United Kingdom, attempting to kill a former defector and his wife using a nerve agent. This act of aggression narrowed the debate within the British and U.S. government and security services about Russia’s hostile intentions. Far from being accepted as a great power with legitimate security interests to be negotiated with, Russia in western eyes increasingly resembles a predator. Its attack in Britain followed a series of Russian actions over the past decade perceived by the West as the actions of an offensively-minded greedy state, from its invasion of Georgia in 2008 to the seizure of the Crimea in 2014 to its ongoing campaign supporting secessionists in Ukraine, its military probes of air and sea space proximate to NATO’s borders, its cyber-mischief, its use of “dark money” to sabotage western democratic politics, and its support for Syria’s tyrant Bashar al Assad. While its aggregate wealth and power is considerably less than NATO’s, it retains advantages such as localized military superiority, a ruthless intelligence network, its pioneering expansion of asymmetric tactics and information warfare, and a large nuclear arsenal. Russia also has a reputation—justified or not—of being willing to resort suddenly to nuclear use against military targets to settle conflicts on its terms, given its rehearsal of such scenarios in doctrine and deed. What will this evolving world of protracted security competition look like? Historical multipolar periods suggest underlying dynamics: antagonistic powers will seek to maximize their security at others’ expense; competition will feature constant measures to seize advantage in areas short of head-on combat. What will this evolving world of protracted security competition look like? This includes expansion into and around disputed territories; espionage and theft; competition for allies; competition for legitimacy through propaganda; trade wars; competition for military advantage, both nuclear and conventional; arms races and the abandonment (or loosening) of mutual restraints such as arms control treaties. In the field of cyberwar, actors will fear all-out strikes on critical infrastructure, and prepare such capabilities for themselves. Nuclear weapons will probably have a restraining effect at the highest level of competition, and reduce the chances of miscalculation, but if growing instability heightens reciprocal fear of surprise attack, it also makes miscalculation potentially deadlier. New technologies from communication to weapons systems will lend the competition greater velocity. As fears rise, states may lose sight of geographical limitation, viewing threats not as discrete, but monolithic and worldwide. They will fear the fall of dominoes, leading to the loss of international credibility and the defection of allies. Defensively-motivated actions will resemble and appear as offense, creating an “action-reaction” spiral. Self-protective forward deployments will look like encirclement. Efforts at negotiation will attract suspicions of cheating. Support for human rights will look like fomenting revolution. All sides will adopt images of the enemy that become self-fulfilling. Great powers will see adversaries as one-dimensional, predatory, greedy states, without legitimate security interests, that can only be countered by creating situations of strength that give firm signals of resolve. An “us” versus “them” mentality is likely to emerge, where “we” have benign motives and must look strong to repel the aggression of malign states and evil empires, and “they” are a killer breed that looks to probe our weaknesses and test our commitment. In a nuclear world, states will not ordinarily seek major war, just seek the fruits of that war by other means.
Unsurprisingly, a growing chorus of voices in the United States is calling for arming Ukraine. A recent report from three leading American think tanks endorses sending Kiev advanced weaponry, and the White House’s nominee for secretary of defense, Ashton B. Carter, said last week to the Senate armed services committee, “I very much incline in that direction.” They are wrong. Going down that road would be a huge mistake for the United States, NATO and Ukraine itself. Sending weapons to Ukraine will not rescue its army and will instead lead to an escalation in the fighting. Such a step is especially dangerous because Russia has thousands of nuclear weapons and is seeking to defend a vital strategic interest. There is no question that Ukraine’s military is badly outgunned by the separatists, who have Russian troops and weapons on their side. Because the balance of power decisively favors Moscow, Washington would have to send large amounts of equipment for Ukraine’s army to have a fighting chance. But the conflict will not end there. Russia would counter­escalate, taking away any temporary benefit Kiev might get from American arms. The authors of the think tank study concede this, noting that “even with enormous support from the West, the Ukrainian Army will not be able to defeat a determined attack by the Russian military.” In short, the United States cannot win an arms race with Russia over Ukraine and thereby ensure Russia’s defeat on the battlefield. Proponents of arming Ukraine have a second line of argument. The key to success, they maintain, is not to defeat Russia militarily, but to raise the costs of fighting to the point where Mr. Putin will cave. The pain will supposedly compel Moscow to withdraw its troops from Ukraine and allow it to join the European Union and NATO and become an ally of the West. This coercive strategy is also unlikely to work, no matter how much punishment the West inflicts. What advocates of arming Ukraine fail to understand is that Russian leaders believe their country’s core strategic interests are at stake in Ukraine; they are unlikely to give ground, even if it means absorbing huge costs. Great powers react harshly when distant rivals project military power into their neighborhood, much less attempt to make a country on their border an ally. This is why the United States has the Monroe Doctrine, and today no American leader would ever tolerate Canada or Mexico joining a military alliance headed by another great power. Russia is no exception in this regard. Thus Mr. Putin has not budged in the face of sanctions and is unlikely to make meaningful concessions if the costs of the fighting in Ukraine increase. Upping the ante in Ukraine also risks unwanted escalation. Not only would the fighting in eastern Ukraine be sure to intensify, but it could also spread to other areas. The consequences for Ukraine, which already faces profound economic and social problems, would be disastrous. The possibility that Mr. Putin might end up making nuclear threats may seem remote, but if the goal of arming Ukraine is to drive up the costs of Russian interference and eventually put Moscow in an acute situation, it cannot be ruled out. If Western pressure succeeded and Mr. Putin felt desperate, he would have a powerful incentive to try to rescue the situation by rattling the nuclear saber. Our understanding of the mechanisms of escalation in crises and war is limited at best, although we know the risks are considerable. Pushing a nuclear­armed Russia into a corner would be playing with fire. Advocates of arming Ukraine recognize the escalation problem, which is why they stress giving Kiev “defensive,” not “offensive,” weapons. Unfortunately, there is no useful distinction between these categories: All weapons can be used for attacking and defending. The West can be sure, though, that Moscow will not see those American weapons as “defensive,” given that Washington is determined to reverse the status quo in eastern Ukraine.
At the same time, Russia’s actions in Venezuela, Syria, and Ukraine correspond to Tkachenko’s theory that Russia is employing “a new strategy for nuclear powers.” This strategy employs nuclear weapons not only to threaten and deter but also to make the world safe for limited Russian wars by controlling escalatory dynamics and conflict regulation processes. The metaphor is ‘careless pedestrian behavior,' i.e. entering a road and forcing drivers to stop their car lest superior force, including nuclear weapons, be brought to bear. In several cases, Russian leaders have utilized military means in a mass, holistically, and in a risky manner. Russian leaders today consider military standoffs with political opponents in neighboring states as comprehensive operations of its Army, operating under the authority of a single commander, while all needed resources are mobilized for the sake of immediate breakthrough. This is an audacious strategy of limited war where nuclear weapons are always there to deter and allow Moscow to take risks to achieve any positive transformation in the status quo. And as we noted above limited nuclear war scenarios – which are intrinsically unpredictable scenarios for nobody knows what will follow the first use of a nuclear weapon -- contain within them an inherent potential for escalation beyond any means of control. Thus the discussion of such scenarios in official circles and the Russian policies of building an entire ensemble of weapons to match to any conceivable future contingency all bespeak an effort to control the escalation ladder throughout any crisis and attempt to dictate terms while threatening even worse escalation. But as Alexander Gorchakov the example of 19th century Tsarist foreign policy that Russian leaders love to quote, memorably wrote, the danger lies in knowing where to stop. On the one hand, Russian diplomats say they want to continue the NEW START TREATY, but on the other hand, these same diplomats then argue that Russia’s most threatening new weapons do not come under that Treaty. Therefore Russia can and must continue to deploy those particular weapons. In other words, Moscow wants to constrain Washington but not itself. Clearly, that is an unacceptable outcome. As the necessity for Putin to continue conducting great power adventures grows with the erosion of public support and the utter repudiation of economic-political reform, the likelihood of his intervening somewhere to sustain the great power myth and obsession along with his power grows and with it the possibility for serious escalation and miscalculation. What Gorchakov’s colleague P.A. Valuev wrote about the “lure of something erotic in the borderlands” still seems to drive Russian statesmen even beyond knowing where to stop. The effort to build a nuclear arsenal that is usable as far as possible across the entire spectrum of conflict is novel and innovative. But when we look at Ukraine and the other examples where Moscow seems all too willing to run the risk of nuclear escalation has it really been a successful strategy not only in our eyes but in Putin’s and is it not subject the law of diminishing returns? Since those returns comprise the future of his system and his state, what then becomes of these diminishing returns to a strategy displaying a readiness to wage even nuclear war when they diminish beyond the break-even point? When that happens what is left to Russia then?
The regional instability and raised profile of nuclear weapons resulting from President Putin’s policies have given rise to increased concern and focus as to Russia’s threshold for use of nuclear weapons. In light of Russia’s evolving concept of strategic deterrence and its integration of nuclear and conventional weapons at the regional level, its threshold for use of military force should be considered first, and in conjunction with the nuclear threshold. This significantly complicates the problem because, as part of its Phase Zero shaping operations, Russia has deliberately created a “new normal” of unpredictability and instability in Europe, blurring and obscuring thresholds for the use of military force. The conflict in Ukraine demonstrated one threshold for escalation – Russia quickly resorted to military force once it perceived that Ukraine was on the verge of being “lost” to the West via closer cooperation with the European Union. Addressing the nation during the ceremony for the signing of the “Treaty on the Accession of the Republic of Crimea to Russia” implementing the illegal annexation of Crimea, President Putin said, “everything has its limits. In the case of Ukraine, our western partners crossed the line, acted rudely, irresponsibly, and unprofessionally.”182 Two years later, he reemphasised the same message, possibly with reference to Ukraine or perhaps his decision in September 2015 to send an expeditionary force to Syria, saying, “we will not let them cross the red line with us. We demonstrated this not so long ago.”183 Where else on Russia’s periphery could its leaders perceive and react to a similar threat, and under what conditions? Comments by President Putin and other Russian leaders in the aftermath of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine further obscure Moscow’s thresholds for use of military force. Are they tied to Russian ethnic minorities, holders of newly-minted Russian passports, former Imperial or Soviet territorial holdings, the varying boundaries of “Novorossiya”, the choices of neighbouring sovereign states about political, economic and security alignments, or something else? This is the setting for an examination of Russia’s potential thresholds for use of nuclear weapons. As noted above, some aspects of Russia’s thresholds for use of nuclear weapons are outlined in the Military Doctrine. The most explicit indication of nuclear thresholds is provided in the statement in which Russia reserves its right to use nuclear weapons “in response to the use of nuclear and other types of weapons of mass destruction” as well as in response to “the use of conventional weapons when the very existence of the state is threatened.” Some commentators have interpreted this as being a high threshold and one that sets the bar higher than in the earlier 2010 iteration of the Military Doctrine. This appears not to be the case in the context of other Russian elaborations of current deterrence concepts and observable aspects of Russia’s nuclear deterrence posture. First, the phrase “when the very existence of the state is threatened” is explicitly tied to the use of conventional weapons. The notion of a threat to the existence of the state should not be conflated with the preceding phrase about use of nuclear weapons in response to a nuclear attack. This alignment reveals three potential thresholds for Russian use of nuclear weapons. First, any nuclear attack on Russia or an ally, without qualification as to the size of the attack, a single weapon or many, or its yield or effects, threatening the existence of the state or not – is one aspect of a potential threshold. Second, any conventional attack perceived according to unknown metrics by the President as threatening the existence of the state is a potential threshold. Third, to return to a point made above, an attack using weapons of mass destruction, a category whose definition is evolving in Russian deterrence thinking, is another potential threshold – again on the basis of unknown metrics. Finally, the linkage drawn between nuclear capabilities and regional stability in the Military Doctrine, along with the related Russian military analyses outlined above, suggests other thresholds for nuclear use in regional conflict scenarios. Russian and foreign experts have asserted that non-nuclear deterrence using conventional long-range precision weapons can have the beneficial effect of raising the nuclear threshold when two nuclear powers are engaged in conflict.184 This may be the case, but it seems doubtful. Looked at from another perspective, it may indirectly lower the threshold for use of nuclear weapons or, more directly, increase the likelihood of conflict that ultimately leads to use of nuclear weapons if it reduces the constraint felt by one or the other adversary about engaging in conflict in the first place. As noted above, President Putin has acknowledged the constraining effect of having only nuclear options for regional contingencies and the greater freedom of action provided by conventional long-range precision weapons. Conversely, he has said “a state with such [nonnuclear precision] weapons at its disposal seriously increases its offensive potential.”185 The notion that use of conventional precision weapons for non-nuclear deterrence can both raise the nuclear threshold and ease the path to direct conflict between nuclear-armed states seems contradictory and dangerous.
It is tempting and provocative to reevaluate Ukraine’s decision to become a Non-Nuclear Weapon State after the Russian annexation of Crimea. It is tempting because Moscow has broken security assurances it made in return for Soviet nuclear weapons based in Ukraine in the early 1990s and Ukraine’s incarnation as a Non-Nuclear Weapon State Party to the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It is provocative because of the ongoing debate over NATO’s nuclear future and Ukraine’s future relationship to the Alliance. In this paper, I deal broadly and specifically with two questions: Whether nuclear weapons play any role in the ongoing crisis in Ukraine, and, at the request of FRS, a counter-factual question, to wit, “What if Ukraine had kept Soviet nuclear weapons?” My first conclusion is that extant nuclear weapons assurances, exercises and declaratory policy—in and from NATO and Russia—certainly play a role in the ongoing crisis, even if this role is necessarily nuanced and confusingly political in light of misunderstanding regarding the terms “assurance” and “guarantee.” Second, Russian nuclear weapons do play a role in Moscow’s signaling during the crisis, as is evident in its decision to execute a major exercise of its triad. As for “Ukrainian nuclear weapons,” my conclusion is that Kyiv derives significant benefits from decisions it made in the 1990s, and that the implied counterfactual conditional—i.e., that if Kyiv had kept Soviet nuclear weapons then it would be in a better position to deal with Russian revanchism—is overwrought with prolepsis. If Kyiv had not finally decided over the course of 1992 to 1994 to abide by its own policy not to use, not to possess and not to allow nuclear weapons on its territory, then far worse things would have happened long before 2014. Indeed, the notion that Soviet/Russian weapons in Ukraine would provide some level of deterrence in 2014 in Crimea is a deeply attenuated proposition—but not because of abstract notions about nuclear weapons, but rather situational uniqueness and practical reality. Russian annexation of Crimea has unfrozen 19th Century animosity, ethnic conflict and modern Russian reinterpretations of its Soviet and post-Soviet past. The price of this revanchism are Russia’s security assurances, but even more broadly, its relationship with NATO as described in the Russia Founding Act. A plausible result of the war is that Ukraine no longer places faith in Russian assurances and will now look westward for new assurances (if not also guarantees). Ukraine is more likely to join NATO than to ever try to obtain nuclear weapons of its own, again, though the former scenario would sill be difficult even after its June 27, 2014 Association Agreement with the European Union. Europe also has a renewed nuclear threat with which to contend, to include Ukraine: reported Russian noncompliance with the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty. Russia has not attacked, and shows no signs of wanting to attack, any NATO Member under NATO security guarantees. Russia’s latest “small victorious war” in Crimea comes four years after NATO debated the relationship of its nuclear forces to its security guarantee and six years after the Russo-Georgian war. Past efforts to replace the NATO nuclear guarantee by reducing, consolidating or withdrawing non-strategic weapons in or from Europe, and intense intra-Alliance nuclear debates, have prepared the Alliance to deal with difficult questions related to the North Atlantic Treaty’s Article V even as the United States and Europe struggle with budgetary strain related to the weapons and platforms that make it salient. NATO’s 2010 Strategic Concept, while different from previous iterations, held in place what was then a political compromise but that is today an absolutely necessary measure of allied reassurance that NATO’s nuclear guarantee remains for all Alliance Members. Results: Ukraine Closer to NATO and Reaffirmation of NATO’s Nuclear Guarantee While the annexation crisis evokes a few nuclear questions unsettled in the past, the more important questions relate to its results for NATO nuclear weapons’ present and future, and the role the NATO nuclear guarantee plays in and among current NATO Members after the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea. Ukraine, while not a NATO Member, has a 1997 Charter on Distinctive Partnership with NATO.[1] Unlike other potential NATO members, the visible contents of current NATO guarantees to Members of the North Atlantic Treaty now matter almost as much for Kyiv as they do for the rest of the Alliance, in particular its newer Members, after Russian annexation of Crimea. Ukraine’s policy of overall restraint in the face of an absolute threat continues a historic line in Kyiv’s security policy that stems from the value it, and the world, placed on its status as a responsible, new democracy. Ukraine’s decision obtains benefits, primarily from the United States and now the European Union, and is consistent with “an approach of bloc allegiance” to Europe and the West even while Kyiv maintains historic connections to Moscow.[2] The longer Russia maintains this crisis, the more it will push Ukraine further toward NATO and increase the salience of NATO’s guarantees to its current Members. Russia is testing the United States and the NATO Alliance, engaging in disassembly of the post-Cold War security architecture in Europe, binding and non-binding agreements, treaties, assurances and guarantees included. Russian noncompliance with the INF Treaty, as publicly reported in The New York Times,[3] has been suggested as a Russian response to the U.S. decision to withdraw from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and failure to agree on missile defenses in NATO. But this Russian interpretation, that Russia picked treaties to leave just like the United States, and Russia decided in 2007 selected to suspend the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty, not the INF Treaty, is too convenient.[4] Russian President Vladimir V. Putin’s March 18, 2014 speech to members of the Russian Federal Assembly (and new “Russian citizens” in Crimea), and a previous speech from Medvedev in late 2011, reveal a combination of far deeper and older reasons than the U.S. 2002 ABM Treaty withdrawal for Russian revanchism.[5] Putin’s short victorious war speech is the end of relatively banal conclusions that have been the operating basis for dealing with Moscow in Europe for the last two decades. Russia has not yet withdrawn from the CFE or the INF treaties, but has suspended its implementation of the former and, according to press reports, is in noncompliance with the latter. Russian conventional forces performed with a high degree of effectiveness in the Crimean invasion and occupation, successfully setting the conditions needed for Russian annexation. Former NATO Supreme Allied Commander Admiral James Stavridis noted that Russia “played their hand of cards with finesse.”[6] This “finesse” included the use and manipulation of both diplomatic and military means and rapid isolation and termination of Ukrainian command and control with advanced, coordinated and effective electronic warfare. All this while Russia simultaneously carried out “snap” conventional forces exercises, on land and at sea, around Ukraine, and a major exercise of all three legs of Russia’s nuclear triad.[7] Russia’s conventional presence now massed could, in as little as 12 hours, move against Ukraine.[8] As NATO Supreme Allied Commander Gen. Philip Breedlove, USAF, noted in April, “This is a combined-arms army, with all of the pieces necessary should there be a choice to make an incursion into Ukraine…supported by fixed-wing aircraft…rotary aircraft…all of the logistics required in order to successfully make an incursion if they needed.”[9] This force—and Russia’s use of it—led one observer to note “the old tired excuse that Russia must rely on nuclear weapons because its conventional forces are weak and broken is now demonstrably absurd.”[10] Over the past five years, well before the initiation of the snap exercises official Moscow used to explain the presence of its forces near the Donets Basin and on the peninsula outside the delimited area of Sevastopol, Russia carried out many more exercises than has NATO involving nuclear forces that focused on NATO as a threat. NATO, until very recently, conducted few similar exercises and has yet to complete new crises management exercises (CMX) involving an Article V scenario in which the nuclear guarantee and shared nuclear forces play a role. Placing official Russian nuclear doctrine next to its ongoing destabilization of Ukraine provides a disturbing parallel. Russia has not publicly reassessed the role its policy assigns to nuclear weapons (strategic and non-strategic) in “military conflicts involving the use of conventional means of attack (a large scale war or regional war).”[11] Public Russian doctrine appears to constrain this use to “preventing the outbreak of”[12] such wars, but Russian nuclear saber-rattling related to these specified uses does not offer comfort for states that might be the subject of regional, conventional wars Russia opts to start on Russia’s borders. A scenario in which Russia starts such a war—uses irregular forces and paid mercenaries—and then blames the state it has penetrated and destabilized, if escalated, can develop into the kind of war Russian nuclear doctrine describes and its covert military and paramilitary forces have started in Ukraine. This leads to a potentially new insight: Heretofore, experts often interpreted public Russian nuclear employment strategy to mean that it depended on its nuclear forces since its conventional forces were shadows of their Soviet past, including the use of non-strategic weapons as “de-escalation” weapons that can be used to terminate conflict. This thought might have been appropriate heretofore since it was generally reasonable to assume that public Russian posturing “reflect[ed] the weakness of Russia in the sphere of conventional forces” and thus Russia “[sought] to maximize its military and political security by whatever means it [had] available.”[13] But now that Russian conventional forces have been used and are being used along with its nuclear forces, the latter as signaling tools and the former to change facts on the ground, lingering Russian nuclear-weapons ambiguities most certainly play roles in the Ukraine crisis. In the ongoing crisis, Russian nuclear ambiguity regarding what its nuclear forces might be used to accomplish, and where they are, particularly with regard to intermediate-range and non-strategic forces implicated in its statements and press reports, and how many of them exist, creates a certain role for Russian nuclear weapons in this crisis. Russian nuclear signaling is a pervasive element of Russian policy, and while this signaling is meant to convey strength, and has two objectives. The first is to display to the United States its nuclear resolve and the second is to test the reactions of U.S. allies in Europe and the world over. It is only recently that Washington has begun to counter-signal, such as its “Global Lightning” exercise of May 2014.[14] Russia, to some extent, and the United States contend that these exercises were scheduled well before Russia’s invasion of Crimea, but within context appear to more than hint at nuclear signaling. The annexation and ongoing crisis has likely had the (anti-Russian) result of further increasing the perceived and actual value of NATO’s nuclear guarantee precisely because it has pushed Ukraine further into NATO’s orbit and diminished the value of post-Soviet Russian security assurances related to Ukraine’s Non-Nuclear Weapon State status, and moreover, because Russia is a Nuclear Weapon State threatening significant conflict. Ukraine is more likely to join NATO, now, than it is to acquire its own nuclear weapons
It has the makings of a new Cold War, or worse. The deep chill in U.S.-Russian relations is stirring concern in some quarters that Washington and Moscow are in danger of stumbling into an armed confrontation that, by mistake or miscalculation, could lead to nuclear war. American and European analysts and current and former U.S. military officers say the nuclear superpowers need to talk more. A foundational arms control agreement is being abandoned and the last major limitation on strategic nuclear weapons could go away in less than two years. Unlike during the Cold War, when generations lived under threat of a nuclear Armageddon, the two militaries are barely on speaking terms. "During the Cold War, we understood each other's signals. We talked," says the top NATO commander in Europe, U.S. Army Gen. Curtis Scaparrotti, who is about to retire. "I'm concerned that we don't know them as well today." Scaparrotti, in his role as Supreme Allied Commander Europe, has met only twice with Gen. Valery Gerasimov, the chief of the Russian general staff, but has spoken to him by phone a number of other times. "I personally think communication is a very important part of deterrence," Scaparrotti said, referring to the idea that adversaries who know each other's capabilities and intentions are less likely to fall into conflict. "So, I think we should have more communication with Russia. It would ensure that we understand each other and why we are doing what we're doing." The United States and Russia, which together control more than 90 percent of the world's nuclear weapons, say that in August they will leave the 1987 treaty that banned an entire class of nuclear weapons. And there appears to be little prospect of extending the 2010 New Start treaty that limits each side's strategic nuclear weapons. After a period of post-Cold War cooperation on nuclear security and other defense issues, the relationship between Washington and Moscow took a nosedive, particularly after Russian forces entered the former Soviet republic of Georgia in 2008. Tensions spiked with Russia’s annexation of the Crimea in 2014 and its military intervention in eastern Ukraine. In response, Congress in 2016 severely limited military cooperation with Russia. The law prohibits "military-to-military cooperation" until the secretary of defense certifies that Russia "has ceased its occupation of Ukrainian territory" and "aggressive activities." The law was amended last year to state that it does not limit military talks aimed at "reducing the risk of conflict." Relations frayed even further amid U.S. allegations that Russia interfered in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, although President Donald Trump has doubted Russian complicity in what U.S. intelligence agencies assert was an effort by Moscow to boost Trump’s chances of winning the White House. After a Helsinki summit with Putin in July, Trump publicly accepted the Kremlin leader’s denial of interference. Marine Gen. Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in an interview Friday that Russian behavior is to blame for the strained relationship. "It's very difficult for us to have normal relationships with a country that has not behaved normally over the last few years," Dunford said. "There are major issues that affect our bilateral relationship that have to be addressed, to include where Russia has violated international laws, norms and standards." Dunford said he speaks regularly with Gerasimov, his Russian counterpart, and the two sides talk on other levels. "I'm satisfied right now with our military-to-military communication to maintain a degree of transparency that mitigates the risk of miscalculation," he said. "I think we have a framework within to manage a crisis, should one occur, at the senior military-to-military level." James Stavridis, a retired Navy admiral who was the top NATO commander in Europe from 2009 to 2013, says the West must confront Russia where necessary, including on its interventions in Ukraine and Syria. But he believes there room for cooperation on multiple fronts, including the Arctic and arms control. "We are in danger of stumbling backward into a Cold War that is to no one's advantage," he said in an email exchange. "Without steady, political-level engagement between the defense establishments, the risk of a true new Cold War rises steadily." No one is predicting a deliberate Russian act of war in Europe, but the decline in regular talks is a worry to many. Moscow says it is ready to talk. "Russia remains open for interaction aimed at de-escalating tension, restoring mutual trust, preventing any misinterpretations of one another's intentions, and reducing the risk of dangerous incidents," the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement last week in response to NATO's 70th anniversary celebration. Sam Nunn, who served in the Senate as a Democrat from Georgia from 1972 to 1997, argues that dialogue with Russia is too important to set aside, even if it carries domestic political risk. "You can't call time out," he said in an interview. "The nuclear issues go on, and they're getting more dangerous." Nunn co-wrote an opinion piece with former Secretary of State George Shultz and former Defense Secretary William Perry arguing that the U.S. and its allies and Russia are caught in a "policy paralysis" that could lead to a military confrontation and potentially the first use of nuclear weapons since the U.S. bombed Japan in August 1945. "A bold policy shift is needed," they wrote in the Wall Street Journal on Thursday, "to support a strategic re-engagement with Russia and walk back from this perilous precipice. Otherwise, our nations may soon be entrenched in a nuclear standoff more precarious, disorienting and economically costly than the Cold War." A group of U.S., Canadian, European and Russian security experts and former officials in February issued a call for talks with Russia on crisis management. "The risks of mutual misunderstanding and unintended signals that stem from an absence of dialogue relating to crisis management ... are real," the Euro-Atlantic Security Leadership Group said in a statement. It said this could lead to conventional war with Russia or, in a worst case scenario, “the potential for nuclear threats, or even nuclear use, where millions could be killed in minutes.”
Aleksey Arbatov, a foreign policy specialist at the Institute of World Economics and International affairs, says that “any armed clash between Russia and the US with a high degree of probability will escalate into nuclear war,” a warning reflecting an all too real possibility but also one intended to keep the US from responding to Russian aggression. Writing in Novaya gazeta, the academician says that the current situation is being made worse by “a new threat” that may be “the most fundamental one: the military and political establishments of Russia and the US already in reality are allowing for a direct clash of their armies and fleets” (novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/12/03/78784-za-etim-porogom-ne-ray). At the beginning of the Cold War, the two leaderships engaged in several “tests of strength,” but after the Caribbean missile crisis in 1962, they became “much more careful and began to respect one another as worthy opponents and even to search for a basis of professional mutual understanding,” Arbatov says. The military leaders of the two countries now “do not respect each other,” despite the obvious reasons fore ach to do so. Instead, they calmly talk “about the possibility of war and even of nuclear war,” despite the certainty that such a conflict would have completely unacceptable consequences. “A new generation has arisen which does not understand and does not want to know the experience” of the past and did not experience “the most horrific psychological stress of crisis situations.” Not only has the World War II generation passed from the scene, so too has the one that was at the center of the Cold War. According to Arbatov, “It sometimes seems that the present-day leaders of the great powers and their advisors who are responsible for the security of their countries and the entire world consider themselves to be the first people on this earth as if no one lived before them” or had anything to offer them. Instead, they seem to have to learn everything over again. And there is less pressure on them to learn quickly because people around are focused on all kinds of things other than the threat of a new war. “Today, for Europe, Brexit and migration are the most important things; for the US, a wall with Mexico and tariffs; and for Russia, the Kerch straits.” Moreover, “the danger of war is growing not according to the scenarios of 40 years ago: this is a qualitatively different and more complex threat, but it is very serious and completely real. A military clash between Russia and the US can at any moment take place in Syria, the Baltics, the Arctic, or around Ukraine.” Tragically, Arbatov continues, this is something that leaders and societies “periodically forget.” Such problems must be discussed, he concludes. “But the main condition of such a discussion must be the presence of different but competent opinions which express themselves in understandable language and are not cut off from good sense.” At one level, of course, Arbatov’s argument is compelling; but at another, there is a problem. His words are far more likely to be accepted by political elites in the West which clearly do not want war than by Vladimir Putin and his entourage in the Kremlin who constantly talk about a conflagration. And because that is so, one can hardly avoid the conclusion that at least in part Arbatov’s real message is that the West should not stand up to Putin’s aggression because that could lead to a nuclear war, an argument that is very effective in the West but one that does nothing to prevent the Kremlin leader from continuing his assault on the international order.
How Risk Levels Could Rise in the Future Since mid-2014, events involving Russia, Ukraine, NATO, and the United States suggest a potential increase in the likelihood of a conventional conflict between Russia and U.S. allies or partners near Russia. This eventuality would increase the annual probability of a nuclear conflict, inadvertent or otherwise. In terms of the risks of a launch in response to an early warning system false alarm, readers might legitimately expect that improvements in technology and procedures have reduced false alarm rates from what they were decades ago. Yet Russia’s early warning system has significantly degraded since the Cold War and is currently at a historical low point in terms of coverage, thus decreasing the probability that Russian leaders will be continually reassured that no U.S. strike is occurring. Until fairly recently, Russia has operated three or more early warning satellites in highly elliptical earth orbit (HEO) and one satellite in geostationary earth orbit (GEO), all placed so that at least one HEO or GEO satellite is continuously monitoring U.S. ICBMs for indications of launch (Podvig, 2002, p. 49; Podvig, 2013).6 However, as of November 2015, Russia only has one operational HEO and no GEO early warning satellites. While Russia has been implementing plans for next-generation early warning satellites, which could provide additional coverage of oceans, and thus SLBM launches (Podvig, 2004, p. 577), there have been delays (Podvig, 2014a).7 If Russian early warning systems do not improve, or if they degrade again, future false alarm rates could increase relative to historical averages. And, in turn, if Russian early warning false alarm rates increase, the annual probability of a Russian early warning false alarm launch response—or Dead Hand false alarm launch response—is also likely to increase. Changes in crisis perception rates would result in corresponding changes in risk. If crisis occurrence rates rise, so would the annual probability of false alarm scenarios. However, even a low crisis perception rate would be of limited benefit if Russia were to launch in response to a false alarm in a low-tension period or keep the Dead Hand system turned on in a low-tension period: Both of these conditions would result in a nonzero probability of a false alarm launch response, even if the crisis perception rate drops to zero. Since mid-2014, events involving Russia, Ukraine, NATO, and the United States suggest a potential increase in the likelihood of a conventional conflict between Russia and U.S. allies or partners near Russia. 14 Russian Crisis Perception Could Be Linked to Perception of U.S. First-Strike Capability Current literature suggests a number of near-term issues that Russian leaders may see as more threatening than U.S. leaders realize—namely, the possibility that the United States could carry out a disabling first strike against Russian nuclear forces. Concerns about U.S. first-strike capability—and intent—increased in Russia after the 2006 publication of two articles by the U.S. analysts Keir Lieber and Daryl Press (2006a, 2006b), which argued that between its missile defenses and its nuclear and conventional capabilities, the United States could effectively launch a debilitating first strike against Russia’s arsenal (Quinlivan and Oliker, 2011, p. 22). In addition, Russian concerns about force survivability increase the probability that when presented with a serious-looking early warning system false alarm, Russian leaders would use a launchon-warning response instead of riding out the apparently incoming attack. Presumably, there would be a higher probability that Russian leaders would use a launch-on-warning response to a false indication of an incoming attack during a crisis period (when Russia already has heightened expectation of incoming attack) than during a low-tension, noncrisis period. Some Russian analysts argue that a launch-on-warning posture would be the best way to ensure the deterrent value of Russian nuclear forces. Unfortunately, awareness of early warning system degradation does not necessarily mean that Russian leaders will move away from a launch-on-warning posture entirely, especially if they are increasingly concerned about the survivability of the Russian nuclear deterrent. Instead, early warning system degradation might just increase the likelihood of misperception, so that “launch on erroneous warning” becomes more likely (Quinlivan and Oliker, 2011, pp. 26–27).
Previous conflicts in Europe that have included an ethnic dimension as well as external influence should be used as a guide for policy options in Ukraine. The first example is that of Cyprus, which bears in some way a striking resemblance to the overall Ukrainian situation. The island is divided between Greek and Turkish Cypriots, with only Turkey recognizing the northern half of the island as an independent territory. Spurred by ethnic conflict on the island, the ultimate solution was found with the deployment of a United Nations Peacekeeping Force, largely made up of troops from neutral states. The island has remained divided since 1974, though the conflict has largely been dormant since then. What is significant is that all states have been able to continue fairly normalized relations with the Republic of Cyprus (the southern, Greek speaking section of Cyprus) despite the ongoing dispute, granting the country European Union membership in 2004. The lesson to be taken from Cyprus is that a peacekeeping settlement, even without a full resolution to the underlying territorial dispute, can be effective. Since fall 2017, calls for such a peacekeeping force in Eastern Ukraine have been growing, with fairly widespread support, including from Moscow. To discard this avenue in favor of arms support would be a mistake. As noted above, even if the two policies were taken at the same time, such arms supply to Ukraine would only weaken any peacekeeping force while also failing to strengthen the position of the US as a negotiator. Importantly, the deployment of peacekeepers would have to involve concessions made to Moscow, through the lifting of sanctions and/or the de facto acceptance of the breakaway regions’ autonomy. A second model for a longer-term diplomatic approach is a federalization policy that bears a resemblance to the Republika Srpska within Bosnia. The federalization of Ukraine has been suggested by Russia for some time, and it is perhaps time to consider the option seriously. Limited devolution would address the desires of the separatists themselves while meeting Russian requests. Such devolution could come with safeguards, such as disarmament within both Donetsk and Luhansk, with Russia providing security guarantees to both regions. In Bosnia, it has allowed ethnic grievances between groups in Bosnia to be handled in a largely non-violent fashion. The establishment of the Republika Srpska was a hard pill for Western states to swallow, however it became necessary for the higher goal of reaching a peaceful settlement. A key lesson for the United States in Bosnia was that the prevention of further bloodshed was more important than the preservation of Yugoslavian sovereignty. Were the US and its allies to take this lesson to heart and eschew a hard line on Ukrainian sovereignty with the goal of ending the conflict, it could begin a slow path towards improving Western relations with Russia. Finally, any solution will require neutrality for Ukraine. This would mean removing the offer of NATO membership to Ukraine (which arguably placed Ukraine in Moscow’s crosshairs in the first place) and maintaining an economic balance between the European Union and Moscow, while also pushing against formal EU membership. This option has been suggested by Michael O’Hanlon in his new book Beyond NATO, that argues in favor of such proposal for currently unaligned states between Europe and Russia. Removing the NATO offer would be immensely beneficial towards building better future relations with Moscow and ending the Ukrainian conflict. The current predicament the West finds itself in can almost be considered comeuppance for the misguided NATO offer without any security guarantee. Certainly, these solutions would not be preferential for Western policymakers, but that is the nature of compromise. They would effectively reverse decades of US and NATO defense and diplomatic policy. However, current and recent policies have hardly been adequate. There is no possibility of a diplomatic solution that accords full territorial return of Crimea to Ukraine, nor can there be any peacekeeping force dominated primarily by NATO. A further drawback would be the abandonment of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, though the treaty itself was without the teeth for its own enforcement. Any settlement regarding peacekeepers and/or devolution would provide the opportunity to install stronger safeguards for all parties.
More recently, Washington has exacerbated already worrisome tensions with Russia by participating in NATO war games on Russia’s border, approving arms sales to Ukraine and flirting with constructing a permanent military base in eastern Poland. A new policy is imperative. It must recognize that the United States and other major powers historically have insisted on a sphere of influence, indeed a sphere of preeminence, in regions adjacent to their homelands. Wise great powers respect those prerogatives and avoid taking actions that intrude into the spheres of influence of other great powers. The geographic limits of such zones are frequently a matter of contention, but recent U.S. governments have gone much further and challenged the legitimacy of the entire concept. Two secretaries of state, Condoleezza Rice and John Kerry, openly rejected it in response to Russia’s military actions against Georgia and Ukraine. Rice termed the concept utterly “archaic.” That is dangerously unrealistic thinking. Washington and Moscow need to establish clear rules of the road regarding conduct in Latin America and Eastern Europe. U.S. leaders should stress to Moscow that establishing or maintaining military ties with unfriendly regimes like those in Venezuela and Cuba creates unacceptable security headaches for the United States. If the Kremlin wishes to improve relations with Washington, it must cease such provocations and confine its hemispheric ties to normal diplomatic and economic relations. At the same time, Washington should inform Moscow that the days of trying to project U.S. power deep into Eastern Europe are over. The Trump administration then needs to abandon aspirations of adding Ukraine and Georgia to NATO, end arms sales to Kiev, and phase-out U.S. participation in NATO military exercises in such places as Poland, the Baltic republics, and the Black Sea. The other alliance members are unlikely to continue such provocative actions without U.S. involvement. Such a modus vivendi means that the United States intends to remain preeminent in the Western Hemisphere, while Russia enjoys a similar status in a much smaller area in Eastern Europe. The alternative is a continued deterioration of bilateral relations, punctuated by ever-escalating provocations and quarrels. That is a dangerous course neither country should wish to pursue.
The further escalation of the aggressive actions of the Russian Federation against Ukraine up to the level of the full-scale war is not unreal anymore due to the concentration of the forces of the Armed Forces of Russia near the Ukrainian border. President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko made such statement during the debates of the UN General Assembly as 112 Ukraine reported. The president noted that the total number of the illegal armed formation in Donbas is about 35,000 militants and 2,100 military men of the Russian regular army. According to the Ukrainian leader, the total amount of the Russian Armed Forces along the Russian-Ukrainian border is more than 87,000 military men. “The military experts certainly note that the armed groupings at the Russian border with Ukraine are the tactical offensive strike team. It has nothing to do with the defense. They aim for the military strike and Kremlin prepares for it. So, the further escalation up to the level of the full-scale war is not unreal prospect anymore. That is why we have to provide the comprehensive monitoring of the situation along the Russian border with Ukraine in real time,” Poroshenko noted. Earlier it was reported that the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs of Ukraine summarized the events from the beginning of the aggression by the Russian Federation against Ukraine to the fifth anniversary of the aggression. The Ministry outlined that the consequences of the criminal deeds by the Kremlin authorities are unprecedented for post-war Europe. Besides, it was reported that Russia intends to involve all present arsenal, including the cyber means, to influence the upcoming elections in Ukraine.
Newly-inaugurated Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky set the standard when he called for “a strong, powerful, free Ukraine, which is not the younger sister of Russia, which is not a corrupt partner of Europe, but our independent Ukraine.” This pledge and a unique background led Mr. Zelensky to an election victory over then-incumbent President Petro Poroshenko. Mr. Zelensky has dire situations to resolve. Crimea has already been lost to the aggression of Russian President Vladimir Putin. Parts of the country are still in a civil war, also testifying to the ambitions of Mr. Putin. Mr. Zelensky has correctly assessed the Crimean situation in publicly stating the peninsula will not be returned to Ukraine until there is a change in Russian leadership. Concerning the civil war, he has acknowledged the need to deal directly with the Moscow instigators and not their puppets on the Ukrainian battlefields.
President Zelenskiy, who assumed office on May 20, also expresses support for NATO membership. In Brussels he stated that he would continue Kyiv’s “strategic course to achieve full-fledged membership in the EU and NATO.” THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM: RUSSIA Ukraine still has much to do to meet the criteria for NATO membership. MAPs are intended to serve as guides for prospective members to fulfill those criteria. Objectively, Ukraine is as far along as countries that received MAPs in 1999. What has blocked Ukraine’s MAP ambition is Russia and the deference that some NATO members give to Moscow’s views. Another reason for the alliance’s reluctance to grant a MAP is that MAPs do not convey an Article 5 security guarantee. (Article 5, the heart of the NATO treaty, provides that an attack against one member will be considered as an attack against all.) NATO lacks a good response to the question: What does the alliance do if an aspirant receives a MAP and then—before it becomes a full member—comes under attack? The Kremlin clearly wants to return Ukraine to Russia’s orbit, though its actions over the past five years have had the opposite effect. Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and its ongoing aggression in Donbas, which has taken more than 13,000 lives, have persuaded Ukraine’s political elite and much of its population of the need to anchor Ukraine solidly in European and trans-Atlantic institutions and reduce relations with Moscow. If the Kremlin cannot return Ukraine to its orbit, Plan B apparently is to break it. That would explain Russia’s hybrid war and economic sanctions against Kyiv as well as continued fueling of the fighting in Donbas. Moscow aims to pressure, distract, and destabilize the Ukrainian government in order to hinder its efforts to adopt a full set of reforms that would spur economic growth; to frustrate Ukraine’s ability to implement the provisions of the Ukraine-EU association agreement; and to make Ukraine appear an unattractive partner for the West. Russia pursues this course despite its professed adherence to the principles of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act. Those principles include “the right to belong or not to belong to international organizations, to be or not to be party to bilateral or multilateral treaties including the right to be or not to be a party to treaties of alliance.” Moscow plainly does not want to allow Kyiv the right to choose whether or not to be a party to NATO.
That makes Fort McHenry the first American warship to enter the Eastern European waterway since Russia seized three Ukrainian vessels on Nov. 25 in the Kerch Strait. “We routinely operate in the Black Sea consistent with international law and the Montreux Convention and will continue to do so,” said Navy 6th Fleet spokesman Cmdr. Kyle Raines. The Sea of Azov won’t become the new South China Sea (and Russia knows it) Whereas China’s claims of maritime rights over most of the South China Sea have been rejected by an international tribunal, Russia’s rights in the Kerch Strait are well-defined. Homeported in Mayport, Florida, the Whidbey Island-class warship Fort McHenry is embarking the 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit from Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. They’re part of the Kearsarge Amphibious Ready Group., which also includes the Wasp-class amphibious assault ship Kearsarge, the San Antonio-class amphbious transport dock Arlington and their embarked units. Asked if the other ships would join the Fort McHenry in the Black Sea, Raines said only that they’re “underway in the Mediterranean conducting maritime security operations.” “USS Fort McHenry’s transit into the Black Sea reaffirms our collective resolve to Black Sea security and enhances our strong relationships with our NATO allies and partners in the region,” said Vice Adm. Lisa M. Franchetti, commander of the U.S. 6th Fleet, in a separate release.
Franchetti’s vocal support for NATO’s collective resolve in the region comes amid tensions generated by Russia’s ongoing efforts to destabilize Ukraine. The Navy's 5 most dangerous at-sea deployments It's not a peacetime Navy anymore. The rise in new dangers around the globe means sailors are now operating under almost constant threat of attack. That's a big change — and the Navy's top brass is telling sailors to get tough. Russia seized the Crimea Peninsula from Ukraine, a non-NATO state, in 2014, triggering economic sanctions by the U.S. and European Union and retaliatory efforts by Moscow to sway America’s 2016 presidential election. Moscow continues to support armed separatists waging war against Kiev for control of a large southeastern chunk of Ukraine known as Donbass. Russian forces in late November fired on and seized the three Ukrainian vessels sailing through the narrow Kerch Strait to reach the eastern Ukrainian port of Mariupol in the Sea of Azov, which borders Donbass. Moscow continues to detain the 24 sailors and vows to put them on trial. That’s sparked calls in Washington to arm Ukraine with Harpoon anti-ship missiles and heap more sanctions on Russia, but no decisions have been reached on Capitol Hill or the White House.
Russian maritime dominance in the Black Sea is back. The shift was made possible by Moscow’s 2014 seizure of Crimea and subsequent buildup of combat and maritime law enforcement capabilities in the region. The Nov. 25 seizure of three Ukrainian naval vessels off the coast of Crimea has underlined this return, which is one of the most important changes in the region’s maritime security relationships in the last decade. The operation was carried out by coast guard vessels under the Federal Security Service, while Su-25 fighters and Ka-52 combat helicopters from Crimea provided a showy enforcement of the blockade of the Kerch Strait leading into the Sea of Azov. The Ukrainian sailors remain detained in Moscow, and Oleksandr Turchynov, secretary of Ukraine’s National Security and Defense Council, has vowed that Ukrainian ships will return to the Kerch Strait. This shift in the Black Sea has been clear for some time. After observing a series of naval exercises conducted by Russia’s Black Sea Fleet in September 2016, Gen. Valery Gerasimov, chief of the Russian General Staff, announced that “Several years ago the Russian [Black Sea] fleet’s combat capabilities were in stark contrast with that of the Turkish Navy. Some even said that Turkey was in full command of the Black Sea. Now it’s different.” Different indeed. After the Soviet Union’s collapse, the Black Sea Fleet suffered through over two decades of steep decline, operating only a very small handful of aging vessels that spent nearly all of their time tied up to rented piers at Sevastopol in Crimea. In 2015, after six years of thoroughgoing military reform followed by the seizure of Crimea, Moscow began placing new, advanced surface combatants and submarines in the Black Sea Fleet, alongside a massive shore-based buildup of air defense and coastal defense cruise missiles. A more capable and confident fleet then steamed into the Mediterranean to support Russia’s successful intervention to prop up the Assad regime in Syria. Three years later, in 2018, Russia still possesses the Black Sea region’s dominant maritime military. Moscow is using that force in an attempt to fulfill its strategic goal of, “reshap[ing] the geopolitical and geo-economic balance of the Black Sea region” in its favor.
Both efforts are proceeding apace. In November 2017, Gerasimov noted that Russia has established a “self-sufficient military formation” consisting of an air defense division, an aviation division, a naval base, and an army corps. While Russia still has a long way to go before achieving a fully integrated capacity to conduct joint warfare, its military has made great strides after its poor performance in the 2008 Russo-Georgian War. In addition, Moscow has shifted some of its most advanced anti-air and anti-surface weapons to Crimea to reinforce its naval forces there. In the Black Sea region, this growing fusion of shore- and sea-based capabilities is the fulcrum upon which the maritime balance in the Black Sea has tipped in Russia’s favor. Russia’s Counter-Navy The shore-based force in particular is the key to Russian military superiority in the region. The seizure of Crimea has allowed Russia to use long-range, land-based anti-air and anti-ship systems, such as its well-known S-400 SAM and Bastion-P coastal defense cruise missile system, to cover virtually all of the Black Sea. The S-400 missile system has medium- and long-range variants, and, with ranges up to 250 kilometers, it is one of the most lethal on the planet. Prior to the Nov. 25 Kerch Strait incident, there were four battalions of S-400s in Crimea. Moscow moved a fifth battalion to Dzhankoi after the incident, but this deployment had probably been planned since at least September. They are complimented by the S-300 SAM and Pantsir-S1 point defense system. Similarly, the P-800 Oniks anti-ship cruise missile, part of the Bastion-P system, has a range of up to 300 kilometers and travels at nearly mach 2.5, making it extraordinarily difficult to defeat with kinetic means. Further, the mobility of the transporter erector launchers and other equipment associated with these systems makes them highly survivable. Weapons cannot shoot what they cannot target, however. An equally important military consequence of the seizure of Crimea is that Russian over-the-horizon sensor systems are able to cover nearly all of the Black Sea. When Russian surface-to-air missiles began streaming into Crimea in 2014 and 2015, air defense radars, including long-range early warning, target acquisition, and target engagement radars, began proliferating as well. “There are air defense systems on every cape here,” one Crimean villager told a Reuters reporter in 2016. Moscow also moved in the Monolit-B radar system, an active and passive search and targeting radar that provides coverage of nearly the entire Black Sea when it is positioned at Sevastopol. It has a passive detection range of some 450 kilometers and provides the Russian military with an excellent real-time picture of the positions of foreign surface vessels operating in the Black Sea.
Notably, the potential for Russian electronic warfare in the Black Sea has also increased. In June 2016, a massive GPS spoofing event took place in the eastern Black Sea (in October and November 2018, Russia reportedly jammed GPS signals during NATO’s Operation Trident Juncture exercise in the Norwegian Sea). The U.S. Coast Guard reported that ships operating off the coast of Novorossiysk received GPS locations that were 25 nautical miles off, near the municipal airport. The incident has led some observers to conclude that Moscow was experimenting with electronic warfare measures to either spoof munitions that use GPS guidance or to confuse U.S. drone flights. In March 2017, Russia also began operating the brand new Murmansk BN system in Crimea, which is designed to collect electronic intelligence and jam high-frequency communications at long ranges. In 2015, Ukrainian observers also spotted the Krasukha-4 in Crimea, a ground-based jammer capable of fouling space-based, airborne, and ground radar readings at a range of some 300 kilometers. This “counter-navy,” rather than the Black Sea Fleet naval forces themselves, is the backbone of the maritime challenge in the Black Sea basin. The combination of Crimea-based, active, and passive mobile, long-range, over-the-horizon radars allows for excellent air and surface situational awareness. The anti-air and anti-surface missile batteries are among the most advanced on Earth, and their mobility makes them extremely difficult to target and destroy. Because they are land-based, they can also operate on interior lines of communication and are more readily resupplied than are ships at sea. Further, the presence of several dozen tactical fixed-wing strike and fighter aircraft particularly augments Russia’s anti-surface firepower in the Black Sea. In short, compared to surface warships and submarines, these systems offer excellent detection capabilities, a comparatively similar amount of punch, and a higher degree of survivability for a fraction of the cost. On their own, they are a significant sea denial challenge, but when coupled with the Russian Black Sea Fleet’s recently improved capabilities, they tip the regional military balance firmly in Moscow’s favor. If Gerasimov was correct in 2016 that Turkey once had the region’s dominant navy, then that navy, even with U.S. help, would face a monumentally difficult task in taking on Russia in the Black Sea in 2018.
Moscow’s objectives in the region are not merely limited to the Black Sea basin. While the Black Sea Fleet assists with the defense of southern maritime approaches to Russia, it also allows Moscow to use the Black Sea as a jumping off point into the eastern and central Mediterranean. From Moscow’s perspective, these activities enable its diplomacy and power projection into areas where Russia previously had limited influence, and they retard (slow down) what Russia believes are U.S. and NATO efforts to destabilize its partners in places like Syria. The fleet, with its so-called “Permanent Operational Formation” in the eastern Mediterranean, is the power projection lynchpin. The annexation of Crimea has allowed Russia to place increasing emphasis on fleet development as an instrument of regional power. What was once a Russian naval backwater is now the centerpiece of Russian power projection into the Mediterranean. Indeed, setting aside the nuclear deterrent mission carried out by the Northern and Pacific Fleets, the Black Sea Fleet has proven to be the most operationally and tactically successful of Russia’s four major fleets.
In addition to basic power projection, the Black Sea Fleet has proven its ability to provide significant operational military benefits. Enabled in part by the fleet, expeditionary operations like that in Syria, once considered unthinkable, have been deftly executed. The Moskva, for example, provided air defense for Russian units in the early days of the Syrian operation. Most importantly, the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla have demonstrated Russia’s new proficiency with long-range land-attack cruise missiles, a capability that was once monopolized by the United States and which Russian military strategists place huge value on. While Russia can muster nowhere near the salvo size of cruise missile launches that the United States can (the U.S. military launched more cruise missiles in one strike in April 2018 than Russia has launched since it entered the conflict), it has nevertheless proven that it is proficient at long-range, high-precision, standoff warfare. This has been a military-technological goal for Moscow since at least 1991, when the first Gulf War showed that precision strikes could cripple a military’s ability to fight effectively.
Under a blazing sun in early June, a group of pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine were digging amid pine woods near the town of Krazny Liman. Their grizzled commander was a bearded man in his 50s who would not tell us where he was from, but acknowledged that he wasn't local. He was proud to show off his unit's most prized possession -- a truck-mounted anti-aircraft unit that was Russian-made. He told us the weapon had been seized from a Ukrainian base. A few miles away, in the town of Kramatorsk, rebel fighters displayed two combat engineering tanks they said they had seized them from a local factory. Eastern Ukraine has long been a center of weapons production. They had parked one of the tanks next to the town square. These were just two instances of how the rebels in eastern Ukraine were steadily adding more sophisticated weapons to their armory, including tanks, multiple rocket launchers -- and anti-aircraft systems. Kerry: &#39;Moment of truth&#39; for Putin Kerry: 'Moment of truth' for Putin 01:15 Officials: &#39;Buk sent back to Russia&#39; Officials: 'Buk sent back to Russia' 02:05 Who fired the Buk missile launcher? Who fired the Buk missile launcher? 02:03 Video appears to show black box from MH17 Video appears to show black box from MH17 01:03 Debris from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 sits in a field at the crash site in Hrabove, Ukraine, on September 9, 2014. The Boeing 777 was shot down July 17, 2014, over Ukrainian territory controlled by pro-Russian separatists. All 298 people on board were killed. In an October 2015 report, Dutch investigators found the flight was shot down by a warhead that fit a Buk rocket, referring to Russian technology, Dutch Safety Board Chairman Tjibbe Joustra said. Photos: Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 crashes in Ukraine A diver searches for the jet&#39;s flight data recorders on July 18, 2014. Coal miners search the crash site. Wreckage from the Boeing 777 lies on the ground July 18, 2014. People search for bodies of passengers on July 18, 2014. A woman walks past a body covered with a plastic sheet near the crash site July 18, 2014. Belongings of passengers lie in the grass on July 18, 2014. People inspect the crash site on Thursday, July 17, 2014. People walk amid the debris at the site of the crash. Debris smoulders in a field near the Russian border. Fire engines arrive at the crash site. A man stands next to wreckage. Debris from the crashed jet lies in a field in Ukraine. Family members of those aboard Flight 17 leave Schiphol Airport near Amsterdam, Netherlands. A large piece of the plane lies on the ground. Luggage from the flight sits in a field at the crash site. A couple walks to the location at Schiphol Airport where more information would be given regarding the flight. Flight arrivals are listed at the Kuala Lumpur International Airport in Sepang, Malaysia. Debris from the Boeing 777, pictured on July 17, 2014. A man inspects debris from the plane. Wreckage from the plane is seen on July 17, 2014. A man talks with security at Schiphol Airport on July 17, 2014. Wreckage burns in Ukraine. A man stands next to the wreckage of the airliner. People inspect a piece of wreckage believed to be from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. This image was posted to &lt;a href=&quot;https://twitter.com/MatevzNovak&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Twitter&lt;/a&gt;. People inspect a piece of wreckage believed to be from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. This image was posted to Twitter. A piece of wreckage believed to be Debris from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 sits in a field at the crash site in Hrabove, Ukraine, on September 9, 2014. The Boeing 777 was shot down July 17, 2014, over Ukrainian territory controlled by pro-Russian separatists. All 298 people on board were killed. In an October 2015 report, Dutch investigators found the flight was shot down by a warhead that fit a Buk rocket, referring to Russian technology, Dutch Safety Board Chairman Tjibbe Joustra said. Australian and Dutch experts examine the area of the crash on August 3, 2014. A woman walks with her bicycle near the crash site on August 2, 2014. Police secure a refrigerated train loaded with bodies of passengers from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 as it arrives in a Kharkiv, Ukraine, factory on July 22, 2014. A pro-Russian rebel passes wreckage from the crashed jet near Hrabove on Monday, July 21, 2014. Wreckage from the jet lies in grass near Hrabove on July 21, 2014. A man covers his face with a rag as members of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the Dutch National Forensic Investigations Team inspect bodies in a refrigerated train near the crash site in eastern Ukraine on July 21, 2014. Emergency workers carry a victim&#39;s body in a bag at the crash site on July 21, 2014. A piece of the plane lies in the grass in eastern Ukraine&#39;s Donetsk region on July 21, 2014. An armed pro-Russian rebel stands guard next to a refrigerated train loaded with bodies in Torez, Ukraine, on Sunday, July 20, 2014. Ukrainian State Emergency Service employees sort through debris on July 20, 2014, as they work to locate the deceased. A woman covers her mouth with a piece of fabric July 20, 2014, to ward off smells from railway cars that reportedly contained passengers&#39; bodies. Toys and flowers sit on the charred fuselage of the jet as a memorial on July 20, 2014. People search a wheat field for remains in the area of the crash site on July 20, 2014. A woman walks among charred debris at the crash site on July 20, 2014. Emergency workers load the body of a victim onto a truck at the crash site on Saturday, July 19, 2014. Emergency workers carry the body of a victim at the crash site on July 19, 2014. A large piece of the main cabin is under guard at the crash site on July 19, 2014. Victims&#39; bodies are placed by the side of the road on July 19, 2014, as recovery efforts continue at the crash site. International officials lament the lack of a secured perimeter. A man looks through the debris at the crash site on July 19, 2014. An envelope bearing the Malaysia Airlines logo is seen at the crash site on July 19, 2014. Armed rebels walk past large pieces of the Boeing 777 on July 19, 2014. Ukrainian rescue workers walk through a wheat field with a stretcher as they collect the bodies of victims on July 19, 2014. A woman looks at wreckage on July 19, 2014. Pro-Russian rebels stand guard as the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe delegation arrives at the crash site on Friday, July 18, 2014. A woman walks through the debris field on July 18, 2014. Pro-Russian rebels stand guard at the crash site. Wreckage from Flight 17 lies in a field in Shaktarsk, Ukraine, on July 18, 2014. A man covers a body with a plastic sheet near the crash site on July 18, 2014. The passengers and crew hailed from all over the world, including Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Germany and Canada. A diver searches for the jet&#39;s flight data recorders on July 18, 2014. Coal miners search the crash site. Wreckage from the Boeing 777 lies on the ground July 18, 2014. People search for bodies of passengers on July 18, 2014. A woman walks past a body covered with a plastic sheet near the crash site July 18, 2014. Belongings of passengers lie in the grass on July 18, 2014. People inspect the crash site on Thursday, July 17, 2014. People walk amid the debris at the site of the crash. Debris smoulders in a field near the Russian border. Fire engines arrive at the crash site. A man stands next to wreckage. Debris from the crashed jet lies in a field in Ukraine. Family members of those aboard Flight 17 leave Schiphol Airport near Amsterdam, Netherlands. A large piece of the plane lies on the ground. Luggage from the flight sits in a field at the crash site. A couple walks to the location at Schiphol Airport where more information would be given regarding the flight. Flight arrivals are listed at the Kuala Lumpur International Airport in Sepang, Malaysia. Debris from the Boeing 777, pictured on July 17, 2014. A man inspects debris from the plane. Wreckage from the plane is seen on July 17, 2014. A man talks with security at Schiphol Airport on July 17, 2014. Wreckage burns in Ukraine. A man stands next to the wreckage of the airliner. People inspect a piece of wreckage believed to be from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. This image was posted to &lt;a href=&quot;https://twitter.com/MatevzNovak&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Twitter&lt;/a&gt;. People inspect a piece of wreckage believed to be from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. This image was posted to Twitter. A piece of wreckage believed to be from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. This image was posted to &lt;a href=&quot;https://twitter.com/MatevzNovak&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Twitter&lt;/a&gt;. A piece of wreckage believed to be from MH17. This image was posted to &lt;a href=&quot;https://twitter.com/MatevzNovak&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Twitter&lt;/a&gt;. An airsickness bag believed to be from MH17. This image was posted to &lt;a href=&quot;https://twitter.com/MatevzNovak&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Twitter&lt;/a&gt;. A piece of wreckage believed to be from MH17. This image was posted to &lt;a href=&quot;https://twitter.com/MatevzNovak&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Twitter&lt;/a&gt;. Debris from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 sits in a field at the crash site in Hrabove, Ukraine, on September 9, 2014. The Boeing 777 was shot down July 17, 2014, over Ukrainian territory controlled by pro-Russian separatists. All 298 people on board were killed. In an October 2015 report, Dutch investigators found the flight was shot down by a warhead that fit a Buk rocket, referring to Russian technology, Dutch Safety Board Chairman Tjibbe Joustra said. Australian and Dutch experts examine the area of the crash on August 3, 2014. A woman walks with her bicycle near the crash site on August 2, 2014. Police secure a refrigerated train loaded with bodies of passengers from Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 as it arrives in a Kharkiv, Ukraine, factory on July 22, 2014. A pro-Russian rebel passes wreckage from the crashed jet near Hrabove on Monday, July 21, 2014. Wreckage from the jet lies in grass near Hrabove on July 21, 2014. A man covers his face with a rag as members of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the Dutch National Forensic Investigations Team inspect bodies in a refrigerated train near the crash site in eastern Ukraine on July 21, 2014. Emergency workers carry a victim&#39;s body in a bag at the crash site on July 21, 2014. A piece of the plane lies in the grass in eastern Ukraine&#39;s Donetsk region on July 21, 2014. An armed pro-Russian rebel stands guard next to a refrigerated train loaded with bodies in Torez, Ukraine, on Sunday, July 20, 2014. Ukrainian State Emergency Service employees sort through debris on July 20, 2014, as they work to locate the deceased. A woman covers her mouth with a piece of fabric July 20, 2014, to ward off smells from railway cars that reportedly contained passengers&#39; bodies. Toys and flowers sit on the charred fuselage of the jet as a memorial on July 20, 2014. People search a wheat field for remains in the area of the crash site on July 20, 2014. A woman walks among charred debris at the crash site on July 20, 2014. Emergency workers load the body of a victim onto a truck at the crash site on Saturday, July 19, 2014. Emergency workers carry the body of a victim at the crash site on July 19, 2014. A large piece of the main cabin is under guard at the crash site on July 19, 2014. Victims&#39; bodies are placed by the side of the road on July 19, 2014, as recovery efforts continue at the crash site. International officials lament the lack of a secured perimeter. A man looks through the debris at the crash site on July 19, 2014. An envelope bearing the Malaysia Airlines logo is seen at the crash site on July 19, 2014. Armed rebels walk past large pieces of the Boeing 777 on July 19, 2014. Ukrainian rescue workers walk through a wheat field with a stretcher as they collect the bodies of victims on July 19, 2014. A woman looks at wreckage on July 19, 2014. Pro-Russian rebels stand guard as the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe delegation arrives at the crash site on Friday, July 18, 2014. A woman walks through the debris field on July 18, 2014. Pro-Russian rebels stand guard at the crash site. Wreckage from Flight 17 lies in a field in Shaktarsk, Ukraine, on July 18, 2014. A man covers a body with a plastic sheet near the crash site on July 18, 2014. The passengers and crew hailed from all over the world, including Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Germany and Canada. In early June, they began to target Ukrainian planes and helicopters, with some success. The day after we met the commander in the pine woods, an Antonov AN-26 transport plane was brought down over nearby Slovyansk. Several Mi-8 and Mi-24 helicopters were also hit in this period, as was an Ilyushin IL-76 cargo plane near Luhansk -- it is about the size of a passenger jet. Forty-nine military personnel were killed when the IL-76 crashed short of the airport. For the most part, these aircraft were flying at relatively low altitudes, and were targeted by shoulder-launched SA-7 missiles and anti-aircraft guns. The pro-Russian rebels had taken control of several Ukrainian military depots and bases and stripped them of their weapons. The SA-7 was standard Soviet issue. Relatively easy to operate, it is effective to altitudes of some 2,500 meters (8,000 feet). But it and ZU 23-2 anti-aircraft batteries, which rebel units also obtained, are a world away from the SA-11 or "Buk" system that seems increasingly likely to have been used to shoot down Flight MH17 on Thursday. Stealing a Buk Could the pro-Russian rebels have acquired a serviceable Buk from a Ukrainian base and operated it? The evidence is circumstantial; a great deal of Ukrainian military hardware is in poor condition or redundant. But on June 29, rebels raided the Ukrainian army's A-1402 missile facility near Donetsk. Photographs show them examining what they found. The Russian website Vosti ran an article the same day titled "Skies of Donetsk will be defended by surface-to-air missile system Buk." The article claimed: "The anti-air defense point is one of the divisions of the missile corps and is equipped with motorized "Buk" anti-aircraft missile systems." Peter Felstead, an expert on former Soviet military hardware at Janes IHS, says that "the Buk is in both the Russian and Ukrainian inventories, but it's unclear whether the one suspected in the shoot-down was taken by rebels when they overran a Ukrainian base, or was supplied by Russia." He told CNN that the Buk "would normally operate with a separate radar that picks up the overall air picture. This was almost certainly not the case with MH17," making it more difficult to identify the target and track its course. Among the pro-Russian rebels are fighters who served in the Russian army. It is possible that some were familiar with the Buk, but Felstead agrees with the U.S. and Ukrainian assessment that Russian expertise would have been needed to operate it. A birthday card found in a sunflower field near the crash site of &lt;a href=&quot;http://www.cnn.com/specials/world/mh17-specials-page/index.html&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Malaysia Airlines Flight 17&lt;/a&gt; in eastern Ukraine, on Thursday, July 24. The passenger plane was shot down July 17 above Ukraine. All 298 people aboard were killed, and much of what they left behind was scattered in a vast field of debris. Photos: MH17: What they left behind Pieces of a wristwatch lie on a plastic cover at the crash site. A toy monkey. Books, bags, a tourist T-shirt. Ukraine&#39;s government said it had received reports of looting, and it urged relatives to cancel the victims&#39; credit cards. But a CNN crew at the scene July 19 said it did not see any signs of looting. Passports were scattered across the large field. Playing cards and euros are seen at the crash site. A travel guide and toiletries. Luggage on Friday, July 18. An empty suitcase is cordoned off near the plane&#39;s impact site on Thursday, July 17. A birthday card found in a sunflower field near the crash site of &lt;a href=&quot;http://www.cnn.com/specials/world/mh17-specials-page/index.html&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Malaysia Airlines Flight 17&lt;/a&gt; in eastern Ukraine, on Thursday, July 24. The passenger plane was shot down July 17 above Ukraine. All 298 people aboard were killed, and much of what they left behind was scattered in a vast field of debris. A classical music record is seen among the sunflowers on July 24. A shoe, appearing to be brand new, sits under foliage at the crash site. Two Dutch passports belonging to passengers lie in a field at the site of the crash on Tuesday, July 22. Clothing, sunglasses and chocolate are seen on July 22. More sunglasses and a travel guide lie in the field on July 22. A doll is seen on the ground on Saturday, July 19. A single shoe is seen among the debris and wreckage on July 19. There has been concern that the site has not been sealed off properly and that vital evidence is being tampered with. Pieces of a wristwatch lie on a plastic cover at the crash site. A toy monkey. Books, bags, a tourist T-shirt. Ukraine&#39;s government said it had received reports of looting, and it urged relatives to cancel the victims&#39; credit cards. But a CNN crew at the scene July 19 said it did not see any signs of looting. Passports were scattered across the large field. Playing cards and euros are seen at the crash site. A travel guide and toiletries. Luggage on Friday, July 18. An empty suitcase is cordoned off near the plane&#39;s impact site on Thursday, July 17. A birthday card found in a sunflower field near the crash site of &lt;a href=&quot;http://www.cnn.com/specials/world/mh17-specials-page/index.html&quot; target=&quot;_blank&quot;&gt;Malaysia Airlines Flight 17&lt;/a&gt; in eastern Ukraine, on Thursday, July 24. The passenger plane was shot down July 17 above Ukraine. All 298 people aboard were killed, and much of what they left behind was scattered in a vast field of debris. A classical music record is seen among the sunflowers on July 24. A shoe, appearing to be brand new, sits under foliage at the crash site. Two Dutch passports belonging to passengers lie in a field at the site of the crash on Tuesday, July 22. Clothing, sunglasses and chocolate are seen on July 22. More sunglasses and a travel guide lie in the field on July 22. A doll is seen on the ground on Saturday, July 19. A single shoe is seen among the debris and wreckage on July 19. There has been concern that the site has not been sealed off properly and that vital evidence is being tampered with. 01 mh17 left behind 0724 02 mh17 left behind 0724 03 mh17 left behind 02 left behind 0722 03 left behind 0722 01 left behind 0722 01 left behind 0719 RESTRICTED 02 malaysia left behind sho 01 left behind 0718 RESTRICTED 02 left behind 0718 RESTRICTED 03 left behind 0718 RESTRICTED 04 left behind 0718 05 left behind 0718 06 left behind 0718 07 left behind 0718 left behind 01 RESTRICTED Entire family killed in MH17 crash Entire family killed in MH17 crash 03:07 Bodies being taken from crash site Bodies being taken from crash site 01:00 Dutch PM demands access to MH17 scene Dutch PM demands access to MH17 scene 01:03 "The system needs a crew of about four who know what they're doing. To operate the Buk correctly, Russian assistance would have been required unless the rebel operators were defected air defense operators - which is unlikely." It is now the "working theory" in the U.S. intelligence community that the Russian military supplied a Buk surface-to-air missile system to the rebels, a senior US defense official told CNN Friday. Russia has denied that any equipment in service with the Russian armed forces has crossed the border into Ukraine. And Aleksander Borodai, the self-described prime minister of the Donetsk People's Republic, said Saturday his forces did not have weapons capable of striking an aircraft at such a high altitude. But someone in the border region where eastern Ukraine meets Russia has been using an advanced anti-air missile system. Late Wednesday, the day before MH17 was presumably hit, a Ukrainian air force Sukhoi Su-25 combat jet was shot down close to the border with Russia. The Ukrainian Defense Ministry told CNN that the plane was flying at 6,200-6,500 meters (about 21,000 feet) and was hit near a town called Amvrosiivka, which is only some 30 kilometers (20 miles) from where MH17 was hit and 15 kilometers (10 miles) from the border with Russia. The Ukrainian military alleged the missile had been fired from Russian territory. It was the first time that a combat jet flying at high speed had been hit and came two days after an AN-26 -- flying at a similar altitude in the same area -- was shot down further north, in the Luhansk area. Smuggling on the black roads The Russian Defense Ministry said Friday that weapons could not be smuggled across the border "secretly." But they can. By early June, rebels controlled several crossings along a stretch of border more than 200 kilometers (125 miles) long. The border area is open farmland that was neither patrolled regularly nor even marked in many places. Dozens of unmonitored tracks known as black roads -- because they have been used for smuggling -- cross the border. Additionally, the Ukrainian border guard service was in disarray after an attack on its command center in Luhansk early in June. On the road east toward the border through the town of Antratsyt there was no sign of a Ukrainian military or police presence. The pro-Russian rebels had already begun to bring across heavy weapons at that point. A CNN team visited the border post at Marynivka in June, soon after a five-hour firefight involving border guards and members of the self-declared Vostok battalion of rebels who had been trying to bring over two Russian armored personnel carriers. They had been abandoned during the battle. The unknowns are these: Just how much weaponry has been brought in from Russia, how was it obtained, and did it include the SA-11 Buk? In June, the U.S. State Department claimed that three T-64 tanks, several rocket launchers and other military vehicles had crossed the Russian border. Ukraine made similar accusations, saying the weapons had gone to Snezhnoe, a rebel stronghold close to where MH17 came down. The State Department said the tanks had been in storage in south-west Russia, suggesting collusion between the Russian authorities -- at some level -- and the rebels. It said at the time that the equipment held at the storage site also included "multiple rocket launchers, artillery, and air defense systems." It added, notably, that "more advanced air defense systems have also arrived at this site." Moscow rejected the claims as fake. NATO has also released satellite images which, it said, showed tanks in the Rostov-on-Don region in Russia early in June, before they were taken to eastern Ukraine. The tanks had no markings. Even so, some experts, such as Mark Galeotti at New York University's Center for Global Affairs, say the evidence is largely circumstantial. NATO's images did not show the tanks actually crossing into Ukraine. Wherever they came from, Russian language websites soon featured calls for people with military skills to call a number associated with the separatist Donetsk People's Republic if they could help operate or maintain the tanks. One answered, "I served in the military engineering academy...and am a former commander in the intelligence." But the separatists' greatest vulnerability was always from the air. The Ukrainians had already shown, in driving them away from the Donetsk airport at the end of May, that they could use airpower to devastating effect. And they had begun to fly at higher altitudes to avoid shoulder-launched missiles. To hold what remained of their territory, the pro-Russian rebels needed to be able to challenge Ukrainian dominance of the skies. Whether they received help from across the border to do so, and in what way, is the question that governments around the world want answered.
Amidst all the talk of whether the Russian or Ukrainian government bears greater responsibility for the violence in eastern Ukraine and Odessa, we may be losing sight of a crucial dynamic that is happening on the ground. Local armed men in Donetsk, Luhansk, Odessa and elsewhere have started down the slippery slope to warlordism — and Moscow may be encouraging this trend. Warlords, as I discuss in my 2012 book of that same name, are individuals who control small slices of territory using a combination of force and patronage. They are distinct from rebels, because their goal is not really to overthrow a government. Instead they often cooperate and collude with weak, corrupt, or frightened state employees (including bureaucrats and security forces) to maintain their local control. While they may have ideologies and passions, warlords are fundamentally self-interested: What they want more than anything else is to stay in a position of power, so they can coerce and blackmail their opponents while controlling payouts to their allies and clients. Warlords are not just machine-boss politicians, because they are backed by private militias that are willing to go to war to keep them in control. And while they are sometimes popular, and good at distributing the wealth to their communities, warlords rely on illegal activities like smuggling and informal financial links with outside players—not local taxes—for their resources. This latter point is crucial, because as Margaret Levi points out in her classic book, “Of Rule and Revenue,” taxation over the long-term works only when it is matched by accountability to the people. Otherwise tax collectors face constant rebellion (as we know from the history of the American Revolution). A warlord doesn’t have to worry about accountability — just about keeping down local challengers. Warlords rise up any time states become too weak to control their own territories. All nations and all cultures produce people who are willing and able to use force for their own purposes; strong states prosecute those people and put them in prison. Organized criminals all over the world run “protection” rackets that feed off tacit collusion by corrupt state officials. At the moment, we do not know much about the individuals who have seized power in eastern and southern Ukraine. There is good evidence, though, that at least some of them truly are locals and that they do not really constitute rebel forces. For example, C. J. Chivers and Noah Sneider of the New York Times have profiled a commander named Yuri, who is able to control a militia of 119 fighters in Slovyansk because of his past work as a Soviet Army unit commander in Afghanistan. Yuri and his men do not seem to have any clear goals — not of leaving Ukraine, joining Russia, or declaring their own independence. They are not united by ideology, just by their military training and by anger at Ukrainian leaders they consider illegitimate. It appears that at least some of the local population values the protection they provide, but it is not clear exactly from whom they are protecting that population. Ukrainian-appointed local police officers apparently cooperate with Yuri’s unofficial militia even as they go about their paid duties, and Yuri’s men claim to have bought at least one anti-tank grenade-launcher from corrupt Ukrainian soldiers. Kiev has been announcing ever since April 13 that it is launching a major military operation to take back “rebel” held territory in Slovyansk and elsewhere, and Russian President Vladimir Putin has rumbled ominously about his right to intervene to protect the population in what he calls “Novorossiya.” But the longer that Kiev and Moscow practice what amounts to a military stalemate, the more opportunity local armed actors have to change the actual power balance on the ground. They can ensure that either the Russian or the Ukrainian state that eventually triumphs will have to bargain with them in the future. Once ensconced in positions of local power, warlords and their threats of violence are hard to dislodge. States that want to regain control over their territories have to overcome the corruption that encourages their own employees to collude with the warlords. They also need fine-grained local intelligence to successfully coerce or buy off warlord support networks. Buying off a network becomes much harder when it extends to a neighboring capital, and indeed that might be just what Moscow has in mind in this case. Putin has used local warlords in the past to gain political influence in neighboring Georgia, and continues to cooperate with the warlord Ramzan Kadyrov and his militia to control insurgents in the Russian republic of Chechnya. (I detail both of these cases in my Warlords book.) Getting local warlords to do his bidding would be a relatively cheap way for Putin to exercise indirect rule over eastern and southern Ukraine without bearing the costs of military invasion. Yuri may not be a warlord (at least not yet). But conditions are ripe for Putin to find willing local strong-men to entice into his own informal patronage network.
Ukraine currently lacks a central registry of firearms and a comprehensive and modern licensing system. Parliament’s long-standing inability to adopt firearms-related legislation to compensate for these shortcomings means that this situation will likely continue. In these circumstances it is difficult even to dif-ferentiate between legal and illegal fire-arms in the country—and, by extension, to monitor illicit arms flows. While an assessment of the number of illicit small arms in Ukraine is difficult to make, weapons used in or ‘leaking’ from the conflict in the east are plentiful and the number of illicit firearms in circu-lation is significant. The conflict in the east and a general increase in insecurity appeared to correlate with an increase in levels of seizures from 2013 to 2014. Several indicators—including small arms and light weapons seizures, violent deaths, and firearm-related crimes—then showed an improvement in the situation, and all decreased in 2015–16. On the other hand, seizures of ammunition and explosive devices continued to increase between 2014 and 2016, whereas sei-zures of explosive materials significantly increased between 2015 and 2016. These contradictory patterns suggest a complex situation, even though the time period under review is too short and the amount of equipment seized too modest to draw definitive conclusions. More sys-tematic analysis of trends in seizures of ammunition and explosives compared with those of weapons and levels of armed violence may therefore yield a more nuanced understanding and moni-toring of illicit arms flows.Ensuring parliamentary approval of long-pending legislative measures, under-taking ongoing reforms at the Ministry of the Interior, improving cooperation among the relevant agencies—Interior Ministry, SBU, Border Guards, Defence Ministry, Customs—and increasing cooperation with neighbouring countries are among the measures the government can take to address the proliferation of illicit small arms in Ukraine. Without them, the size and make-up of illicit arms flows in Ukraine will remain difficult to monitor and reduce, to the detriment of national security and Ukrainian citizens’ safety.
As pressure on the White House to authorize lethal aid to Ukraine continues from a growing number of former U.S. diplomats and U.S. military and intelligence officials, it is important to have a clear picture of any potential risks in providing the Ukrainian military with weapons. Outside of whether such U.S. lethal aid may provoke Russia to intensify military support to the rebels, there has been relatively little discussion in the U.S. media about other key risks. Yet, high levels of corruption within the Ukrainian military and the military’s use of problematic volunteer battalions present clear challenges in ensuring U.S. weapons are used responsibly in Ukraine. According to Sarah Chayes with the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, “any US assistance [to Ukraine] should be tailored to the realities of a security sector that has been - and still is - dangerously corrupt.” In early January, the Ukrainian presidential advisor and assistant to the defense minister, Yuriy Biriukov, said about “20-25 percent of the money allocated to the Ukrainian Defense Ministry is currently being stolen.” With the Ukrainian military budget hovering around $5 billion a year in the past couple of years, the stolen money amounts to millions of dollars lost to corruption, contributing to a seriously underfunded military. There has also been alleged cases of corruption within senior levels of the Ukrainian military and defense industry. In July 2014, the Ukrainian military prosecutor’s office arrested the head of the Kyiv Armor and Tank Plant, Eduard Iliyin, after he allegedly tried to transfer money designated for production of armored vehicles to the account of a fictitious firm. Mr. Iliyin was also accused of stealing a T-72 tank and attempting to sell seven more. Last November, the head of procurement for the defense ministry, Oleksandr Zrazhevsk, was also arrested for allegedly receiving a bribe to select a fictitious firm to supply diesel fuel to the army. While the administration of President Petro Poroshenko is reportedly rebuilding the leadership of the security services, some Western governments have already changed the way they provide military-related items to Ukraine to deal with the corruption. After NATO military uniforms intended for Ukrainian soldiers reportedly ended up being sold in a Ukrainian street market, Canada required that its winter outfits for Ukrainian soldiers only be delivered to the Ukrainian Council of Volunteers. As the United States plans to send weapons such as anti-tank missiles, it will have to find another way to ensure U.S. weapons are not lost or resold. The United States will also encounter difficulties in ensuring any weapons provided to the Ukrainian military don’t reach several problematic National Guard volunteer brigades. In a joint report issued by three U.S.-based think tanks in support of the provision of lethal arms to Ukraine, it recommends that U.S. weapons and military equipment should go to the “Ukrainian Army only.” One of the reasons for the above-mentioned requirement is the fighting methods of the Aydar and Azov volunteer battalions, which have been strongly criticized by United Nations, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. Fighters from these battalions, known among civilians as the “punitive battalions,” are accused of various crimes including “abductions, unlawful detention, ill-treatment, theft, extortion, and possible executions.” In addition, the Azov battalion decorates their uniform with Nazi insignia as exposed by Norwegian and German TV reporters. While the United States may require that no U.S. weapons reach these battalions, this requirement may prove difficult in practice. According to Ukrainian law, many of the volunteer battalions are now an official part of the National Guard of Ukraine, which is a part of the Ukrainian armed forces, even though some of the battalions still often pursue their own agenda. Ukrainian news sources have indicated that the total number of volunteers is approximately 7,000, subdivided into more than 40 different battalions. Compared to the earlier stages of the current conflict in Ukraine, the cooperation between the volunteers and the Ukrainian Army is now much stronger, and they are often fighting side-by-side on the battlefield. There are numerous accounts of the battalions Aydar, Azov, Donbas and the Right Sector closely collaborating with the Ukrainian Army. The Azov volunteers were at the forefront of Debaltseve counter-offensive coordinated by the Ukrainian Army, while the Aydar fighters were spearheading the offensive in Luhansk. Furthermore, the Ukrainian government recently supplied the Azov brigade with military equipment, including armored vehicles with weapons. Although the Poroshenko administration is concerned about the abuses of some of these volunteers and dozens of criminal cases were opened against the Aydar battalion alone, the administration has been reluctant to address the concern. The administration’s unwillingness to act may be in part because these volunteers have strong support from certain senior government officials such as Arsen Avakov, the head of the Ministry of Interior. Last September, for instance, Avakov named an Azov volunteer as the head of the Kiev police. A Ukrainian governor in eastern Ukraine, Ihor Kolomoyskyy, is also financing some of these brigades and allowing them to flout Ukrainian law.
Here’s a contrast that sums up the David and Goliath aspect of the Ukraine crisis. Picture the sleek, white-hulled vessel Vladivostok, one of two Mistral class warships France is selling to Russia, and compare the bedraggled tents some Ukrainian soldiers sleep in with donations of food jumbled outside and rain-soaked blankets drying over a brushwood fire. The Russian behemoth outmatches its smaller and weaker neighbor, intrinsically. But the gap did not have to be so stark. Nor did the task of confronting irregular separatist militias have to be so hard. At fault is what drove the Maidan protesters to the streets in the first place: corruption. Ukraine is a case study in one of the ways corruption threatens international security: it guts armies. It makes them useless for defending their borders and as allies. United States officials in their rush to aid the Ukrainian military should resist the temptation to turn a blind eye to lingering venality. Ukraine’s future depends on some tough love. “A modern country cannot exist without a modern army,” Ukraine’s Deputy Defense Minister Petro Mehed said at a press conference last month announcing a major military overhaul. “In recent years, [the Ukrainian] army has been systematically destroyed and disarmed, and its best personnel dismissed.” In a 2012 analysis Leonid Polyakov, another senior defense official, detailed the corrupt workings with remarkable candor. Chronic underfunding “enhanced the role of the human factor” in choosing among operational priorities. Ostensibly outdated equipment was sold “at unreasonably understated prices” in return for kickbacks. Officers even auctioned off defense ministry land. Gradually, Kyiv began requiring the military to cover more of its own costs, forcing senior officers into business, “which is…inconsistent with the armed forces’ mission,” and opened multiple avenues for corruption. Commanders took to “using military equipment, infrastructure, and…personnel [to] build private houses, [or] make repairs in their apartments.” Procurement fraud was rife, as were bribes to get into and through military academies, and for desirable assignments. Meanwhile, Ukrainian factories kept on turning out high-quality materiel that was exported for cash to China, Ethiopia, Pakistan, and Russia. The results have been on display for the past two months: helicopters and armored vehicles immobile for lack of fuel or missing parts; soldiers in Crimea turning in their uniforms for promises of a Russian salary five times the paltry $200 per month Ukraine was paying. Ordinary citizens donating some $2 million to the defense budget by texting 565 on their mobile phones. The pervasive corruption within the Ukrainian armed forces has not been “casual,” in Polyakov’s words. There is method to it. Olena Shostko, a law professor at the University of Kharkiv, agrees. Yanukovich “deliberately destroyed the military,” she says, because “he was more afraid of his own people than of external enemies.” In fact, such blunting of the armed forces is a typical feature of many kleptocratic governments. Corruption on the scale Yanukovich practiced it is not some malfunction, or system failure. It is the system. Governments like his are repurposed to serve a function that has nothing to do with public administration: the personal enrichment of ruling networks. And – for a time at least – they perform this task admirably. But the ultimate risks to international security are high. In such countries, kleptocratic networks must seize some instrument of force, formal or informal, with which to intimidate rivals, do-gooders, or the population at large. Cameroon’s Paul Biya, for example, relies on his army’s Rapid Reaction Battalion. Elsewhere (such as Pakistan or Egypt) the army itself may constitute one of the ruling networks. In many places, the lever of choice is a branch of the police. These units serve as the enforcement arm for the ruling clique, which then deliberately weakens other services. The pattern is visible in Nigeria where, despite a state of emergency across much of the northeast, no army reinforcements were available to respond to early warnings of the recent attack on a girls’ school. In Tunisia, in the months after its 2011 revolution, the crippled army ran border patrols with soldiers on camels, as waves of people and contraband and weapons flooded in from war-torn Libya. In Ukraine, while the army languished, the police did Yanukovich’s bidding. And they are detested – especially the “Berkut” anti-riot force. Even back in 2012, according to Shostko, citizens filed 114,474 complaints of police misconduct. Only 320 investigations were opened. The force is huge, 300,000 strong, more than twice the global average density of about 300 police officers per 100,000 people. U.S. officials are anxious to help the Ukrainian military. Last month, retired general Wesley Clark returned from a brief fact-finding mission with a plea for urgent deliveries of U.S. body armor, night vision devices, communications equipment and fuel. Twenty senators co-sponsored a bill calling for lethal as well as non-lethal assistance, including anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons and small arms. But any U.S. assistance should be tailored to the realities of a security sector that has been – and still is – dangerously corrupt. The U.S., in cooperation with NATO allies, should help with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to reduce police ranks, together with reform for the rest. Westerners should draw on lessons from the difficult experiences in the Balkans and Afghanistan, and work closely with New Citizen, Honest and other Ukrainian associations that are already developing such plans. For the army, the sense of urgency – and sympathy for threadbare, outgunned, Ukrainian troops – should not prompt a laissez-faire attitude. Aid contracts should include rigorous independent oversight, also tapping into Ukraine’s committed and increasingly sophisticated independent anti-corruption reformers. Perhaps a NATO mechanism, along the lines of the Individual Partnership Action Plans under the Partnership for Peace program could provide a constructive framework. Those calling for immediate, unconditional shipments of lethal weaponry and other military assistance may think they’re doing Ukraine a favor by rushing in aid at its hour of need. But in the armed forces as in the political arena, most of the Yanukovich-era corrupt networks remain in place. And helping them entrench their positions and tighten their stranglehold over the new Ukraine would jeopardize the country’s future
Sales of illegal weapons have doubled in Ukraine in the past year, according to the national police, many of them smuggled from the east of the country where a war against Russia-backed separatists still simmers. Anti-terrorist operation in eastern Ukraine War Ukraine 28310731341An anti-terrorist operation in eastern Ukraine (CC 2.0)“This year, we held two operations, ‘weapons’ and ‘explosives,’” said Vyacheslav Abroshkin, the first deputy head of Ukraine’s National Police, as he spoke to reporters about the rising tally of police seizures. “During one of these operations, 913 items of firearms, 804 grenades and 266 explosives from illicit trafficking were seized. Also, almost 100,000 units of ammunition and 195 kilograms of explosive substances were seized,” he said. Abroshkin said that a primary challenge for Ukraine’s national police is finding and eliminating supply channels for the traffic, especially those from Ukraine’s troubled east to the west of the country, where there are no hostilities. Ukraine has long been a hotspot in the global arms trade, a situation that has intensified since the beginning of Russia-backed conflict in the east in 2014. Experts worry that more arms in Ukraine could lead to more arms being trafficked to and within Europe, much as the war in the Balkans in the 1990s led to an estimated 6 million guns now circulating on the continent. There is also evidence that many of the arms now in the control of non-state groups in Ukraine fall into the hands of organized crime groups selling arms to the Middle East, often through Odessa, Reuters reports. One factor driving illegal arms sales from Ukraine is the country’s recent bitcoin frenzy, which saw last winter a spate of raids on million-dollar cryptocurrency mining operations. Some of those operations financed separatists in Donbas and Luhansk, said officials, who cited concerns that cryptocurrencies could give weapons traffickers new ways to sell their wares. “Lack of regulation means that cryptocurrencies are being used to finance terrorism, in particular, in the occupied territories of Ukraine,” Ukraine’s interior ministry said in a statement.
On Feb. 12 last year, the same day that a ceasefire ended the worst of the fighting in eastern Ukraine between rebels and government forces, a former rebel fighter seized a chance to turn his inside knowledge of the conflict into hard cash. He traveled to a spot on the Russian-Ukrainian border where he retrieved a cache of weapons hidden there earlier by his comrades in the pro-Russian rebel movement. Four days later, shortly before 6:00 p.m., he and a friend showed up in a taxi at a fuel station in western Russia where they had arranged to meet a contact ready to buy the arms, according to Russian court documents. He and the friend opened the trunk of the taxi, and began transferring the cargo into the buyer's vehicle. Concealed in a sports bag and a rucksack were three automatic weapons, 1,258 bullets, 20 grenades, and 20 detonators for the grenades. The buyer was an undercover police officer and the former rebel, identified in the court documents as Y.V. Mikhailov, was sentenced this year to two and a half years in jail. The fighting in eastern Ukraine between the Moscow-backed separatists and Ukraine's pro-Western government killed hundreds of people, displaced thousands of residents and created a Cold War-style stand off between Moscow in the West. It also had another consequence that is less visible but could in time prove equally dangerous: the conflict took huge amounts of arms out of government arsenals and put them in the hands of irregular units unable to properly control them. Now the fighting has subsided, according to security officials and experts on the arms trade, the weapons are getting into the hands of criminals and being spirited to buyers well beyond the conflict zone. ukraine war rages onMembers of the separatist self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic army collect parts of a destroyed Ukrainian army tank in the town of Vuhlehirsk, about 6 miles to the west of Debaltseve, February 16, 2015. REUTERS/Baz Ratner Interviews by Reuters with security officials and rebels, as well as study of law enforcement data and court documents have shown that weapons are being channeled out of the conflict zone in eastern Ukraine in significant numbers, in some cases as part of an organized underground trade. "Of course, they have moved arms across, and they're moving them across now," Igor, a fighter with a pro-Russian rebel unit in eastern Ukraine told Reuters in an interview. "Mainly they take Kalashnikovs," he said. ARSENALS PILLAGED When, in the spring of 2014, the armed rebellion started in Ukraine's Russian-speaking regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, police and soldiers abandoned their bases. That left the rebel militias to pillage the stores where Ukraine -- one of the world's biggest arms manufacturers - kept its sizable arsenal. Meanwhile on the pro-Ukrainian side, because the army was in near-collapse, irregular militias were formed, some of them only loosely part of the chain of command, and they were given, or scavenged, weapons from official supplies. While the fighting raged, the weapons stayed in the conflict zone. In February 2015, the sides in the conflict agreed a ceasefire. The fighting did not stop, but the intensity subsided, and weapons started leaking out of the battlefield. Official data is patchy but what figures there are indicate the problem is getting worse. The number of prosecutions for weapons offences so far this year in Ukraine is double the amount for the whole of 2015, according to the general prosecutor's office. In many cases, the cause is negligence. Irregular units often do not keep proper control of the weapons in their inventories or fail to make soldiers surrender their guns when they go on leave. "It's mostly people taking them home for the sake of it," said Serhiy Alyoshin, the chief of police in the town of Sloviansk, which is on the edge of the conflict zone and controlled by Kiev. "Some say 'I forgot', some say 'It's for fishing' or 'It's a present for a friend' and then we hear about these things blowing up in apartments, in yards and on the street. It's a threat to national security." ukraineMembers of the Ukrainian armed forces ride on an armoured personnel carrier near Artemivsk, eastern Ukraine, March 3, 2015. Reuters In some cases, Ukrainian security officials said, irregular pro-government units set up private weapons caches to avoid surrendering their arms to the authorities in Kiev, whom they do not trust. In March this year, the police force in Sloviansk uncovered a cache of weapons and explosives in the back of a garage filled with cardboard boxes and household junk. In police footage seen by Reuters, officers laid the weapons and explosives out on the ground. There were at least three anti-tank rocket launchers, several rockets, hundreds of bullets, around 15 hand grenades and two anti-tank mines. ORGANIZED CRIME But there is evidence too of criminal intent to smuggle weapons out for sale to organized crime groups. "Of course, anyone who has the will and the means can get into the business - organized criminal groups have always traded weapons," said Olena Hitlyanska, a spokeswoman for Ukraine's State Security service, or SBU. "Now the channel for buying these illegal weapons has widened," she said. "In past years we seized pistols and rifles that people had in their own collections or for hunting. Now grenade launchers are seized, and blocks of TNT." Igor, the rebel fighter, said there was now a well-organized trade in illegal weapons from easternUkraine into Russia. "If before they shipped whatever came to hand, now it happens in a more orderly fashion, practically by appointment," said Igor, who asked to be identified only by his first name for fear of reprisals for speaking about the trade. ukraineRussia-backed rebels ride on an armored vehicle in Debaltseve, Ukraine, Friday, Feb. 20, 2015. Vadim Ghirda/AP In one rebel unit "they practically keep a list of who will take the iron across the border and when," he said, using a slang term for weapons. He said the weapons were smuggled from rebel-controlled eastern Ukraine into Russia via illegal border crossings. He said much of the smuggling was done by rebel fighters from Chechnya and Ingushetia, in Russia's volatile North Caucasus region, who ship the weapons back home. A spokesman for the rebel administration in eastern Ukraine's Donetsk region, Eduard Basurin, said about arms smuggling: "Maybe at one point it was present, but that this is being done in an orchestrated way, that's rubbish." DESTINATION: MIDDLE EAST So far, there is little evidence of where the weapons smuggled out of the Ukraine conflict zone end up. In May, Ukrainian border guards detained a 25-year-old Frenchman with ties to far-right groups in France who was trying to cross from Ukraine into Poland with weapons including rocket launchers and Kalashnikov assault rifles in his Renault van. Ukraine's SBU said the man had made contact with armed militias in Ukraine and inquired about buying arms from them. When they found out about this, the SBU said its agents sold the man deactivated weapons. But that case appears to be an outlier. The illegal arms trade in western Europe -- where the items most in demand are small quantities of light firearms -- is dominated by supplies from ex-Yugoslavia, and it is unlikely Ukrainian weapons would be able to break into that market. Instead, most of the weapons from Ukraine will be destined for other conflict zones in places such as Iraq, Syria and Libya where there is a demand for heavy weapons in large enough quantities to make it worthwhile for black market arms dealers. Mark Galeotti, an expert on ex-Soviet organized crime, said some of those Ukrainian weapons would be transported through the Ukrainian Black Sea port of Odessa, then into the Mediterranean, some south through the Balkans, and some through Russia's North Caucasus region. "Usually it is relatively easy to get a pistol or anything up to an assault rifle," said Galeotti, senior research fellow at the Institute of International Relations Prague. "But it is much harder to get an RPG (rocket-propelled grenade) or a machine gun or the boring things like spare parts for the above. You actually need to have a proper war for these sorts of things to become available and, lo and behold, you have a proper war," he said. "At the moment you have, from the criminals' point of view, a wonderful opportunity."
A former Ukrainian soldier-turned-arms dealer agrees to meet in Kiev, where he offers to sell a Makarov semi-automatic pistol for about $160. Amid haggling, he drops the price to $120. He says he also has Kalashnikov automatic rifles for less than $400 and can get heavier weapons such as rocket launchers if given a little more time. The war in eastern Ukraine against Russia-backed separatists has led to the uncontrolled spread of firearms throughout the country, with experts describing Ukraine as a “supermarket” where millions of illegal weapons are for sale. Since the armed conflict broke out in 2014, the number of crimes involving firearms has more than doubled in Ukraine, a country where gun ownership was previously very rare. Some of the weapons are also being smuggled out of the country, destined for conflict zones in the Middle East or for Europe, adding to fears of more attacks. Andriy, the arms dealer, fought with the nationalist Right Sector volunteer battalion for more than a year against the separatists. He agreed to discuss the illegal weapons trade on the condition he be identified only by his first name for fear of being arrested. If convicted of illegal weapons sales, he could be sent to prison for five years. With the worst of the fighting in eastern Ukraine now over, Andriy said a used handgun can be purchased there for as little as $20. “But from the east, the road is long and dangerous,” he said, explaining the significant markup he gets in the capital, Kiev. The scale of the smuggling is difficult to judge because Ukraine has made all data about the illegal arms trade classified. Ukrainian border guards, however, regularly report thwarting attempts to transport weapons out of the country illegally. In one of the more high-profile cases, a Frenchman was arrested in May after trying to cross into Poland with an entire arsenal. The Ukrainian Security Service said he was planning a series of terror attacks in France. Each week, the security services and police uncover illegal arms caches with Kalashnikovs, explosives and even rocket launchers brought from the combat zone in eastern Ukraine. Transport police almost daily remove passengers from trains for transporting weapons in their baggage. Most are military personnel or members of volunteer battalions that have been fighting on the government side. Heorhiy Uchaikin, who heads the Ukrainian association of gun owners, estimated that Ukrainians now illegally possess as many as 5 million firearms. “Ukraine has turned into a supermarket for illegal weapons,” he said. “In Ukraine, a gun is like shoe polish in a shoe polish factory.” The only legal market for firearms in Ukraine is for hunting rifles, the sales of which are tightly regulated. Security companies can obtain licenses for guards to carry small arms. Uchaikin is advocating changing the laws to make ownership of handguns and Kalashnikovs legal as a way to regulate the market and address gun crime. Some of the weapons sold illegally were seized from separatist fighters and are believed to have been supplied by Russia. In June, Ukraine’s security services seized more than 200 rocket launchers, 3,000 grenades and two Shmel flamethrowers that are not part of the Ukrainian arsenal. But most of the weapons on the black market come from the Ukrainian military and the around 40 volunteer battalions, which for most of the fighting remains outside the military chain of command. Nadiya Savchenko, a Ukrainian military pilot who fought with a volunteer battalion, blames corrupt military leaders for the flourishing black market. Savchenko, who became a national hero after being captured and jailed in Russia for two years, alleges that weapons that should have been given to Ukrainian soldiers who were called up to fight have ended up on the black market instead. “I remember how it all began: The guys were mobilized but not given automatic rifles,” she told The Associated Press. ”(But) they understood that an automatic rifle is the only thing that can protect their life. And then automatic rifles became worth their weight in gold. They bought them and hid them.” Dmytro, a Ukrainian soldier speaking on condition of anonymity for fear of criminal charges, said when he was called up in 2014 he received nothing but food. “Everyone who was mobilized brought home at least two or three guns,” he said. “For my family it was like hard currency.” He has since signed a military contract and now receives a monthly salary of $320. Over the past two years, about 250,000 Ukrainians were called up in six mobilization waves. Since the armed conflict began in April 2014, at least 9,500 people have been killed. A cease-fire agreement signed in 2015 greatly reduced the fighting, but this summer has seen an uptick in casualties. International monitors have accused both sides of violating the cease-fire by using heavy weaponry that was supposed to have been withdrawn. Government efforts to persuade people to voluntarily surrender their weapons have had limited success. An appeal by the national police force in March yielded 4,500 firearms, more than 300 shells, about 250 grenades and even a grenade launcher. Police Col. Kostyantyn Zhuk said the result was extremely disappointing. “This is just a drop in the ocean,” he said. In 2015, there were 1,526 crimes involving firearms, up from 784 in 2013. The difference is even starker considering the 2015 figures do not include the conflict zones in the east or Crimea, which Russia annexed in 2014. Police said 70 percent of the weapons used in the crimes had come from eastern Ukraine. The other concern is smuggling, with the main route running west through European Union countries Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia, all of which share a border with Ukraine. The Ukrainian border guards say they thwart several smuggling attempts every month. In June, a German citizen was detained while trying to cross into Romania with a firearm and ammunition. On the border with Slovakia, a Ukrainian guard who discovered weapons was shot and wounded by the smugglers, who then fled. Uchaikin, of the gun owners’ association, said the arms are smuggled into Europe along the same routes long used to smuggle cigarettes. He accused the border guards of profiting from the trade and allowing vehicles to pass through without inspection. The Ukrainian Security Service denied this. In announcing the arrest of the Frenchman, the security service said its agents had been tracking him for months and allowed him to buy five Kalashnikovs, two rocket-propelled grenade launchers, 125 kilograms (275 pounds) of explosives, 100 detonators and other arms. The man was planning a series of terror attacks in France before and during this summer’s European soccer championship, the security service said.
Law enforcement agencies of Lvov have established the theft of American weapons from the warehouse of one of the Ukrainian army units in the amount of more than 4.5 million hryvnia.
Over the past decade, Russia has returned as both a major European and, increasingly, global power.1 Its relationship with the United States, antagonistic or cooperative, is consequential for U.S. interests. Specifically, Russia: remains a nuclear superpower, and is the only country that poses an existential threat to the United States and its major treaty allies; is endowed with vast natural resources and has weaponized this asset to achieve its political objectives in Europe;2 has veto power on the United Nations (UN) Security Council, which it has frequently used to thwart U.S.-supported initiatives toward Syria, Venezuela, and North Korea, to name a few;3 is capable of projecting military power well beyond its borders in pursuit of a competing vision of global order and its own great power aspirations;4 and pursues geopolitical ambitions inimical to U.S. interests—notably, the creation of an exclusive sphere of influence in the former Soviet space and opposition to a unified transatlantic community, as well as American efforts to maintain a liberal international order.5 A military confrontation between the two countries could have profoundly destabilizing and even catastrophic effects on global order and security. In contrast, a more cooperative U.S.-Russian relationship could yield progress on threats to U.S. national security and prosperity—challenges that the United States cannot tackle effectively alone. Preventing further nuclear proliferation, including the complex problem of securing nuclear materials and other components of weapons of mass destruction, will require not only greater U.S.-Russia collaboration but also preserving at least some elements of the remaining arms control framework and inspection regimes. Efforts to combat transnational threats, from terrorist movements to criminal organizations and illicit trafficking, would also benefit from U.S.-Russian cooperation. Likewise, it will not be possible to resolve long-standing regional conflicts, for example on the Korean Peninsula and in Afghanistan, Syria, and Ukraine, without U.S. and Russian cooperation and willingness to negotiate. Finally, the United States and Russia will need to find practical ways to avoid escalation of tensions in cyberspace and outer space, and restrain the growth of Chinese influence. Notwithstanding these potentially overlapping interests and opportunities for cooperation, the toxic legacy and current political climate of U.S.-Russia relations make it difficult to address critical questions that should be at the center of the debate about how to manage their strategic competition. What does the United States need from Russia, and what are realistic goals for the relationship? Given the limits on U.S. capacity and political will, how should the United States prioritize its different goals where U.S. and Russian interests overlap and diverge? What price should the United States be prepared to pay to secure Russian support for American policies and initiatives? Finally, how can the United States build and deploy leverage with Russia to secure its preferred outcomes?
That central point is that Russia matters a great deal to a U.S. government seeking to defend and advance its national interests. Prime Minister Vladimir Putin’s decision to return next year as president makes it all the more critical for Washington to manage its relationship with Russia through coherent, realistic policies. No one denies that Russia is a dangerous, difficult, often disappointing state to do business with. We should not overlook its many human rights and legal failures. Nonetheless, Russia is a player whose choices affect our vital interests in nuclear security and energy. It is key to supplying 100,000 U.S. troops fighting in Afghanistan and preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons. Ten realities require U.S. policymakers to advance our nation’s interests by engaging and working with Moscow. First, Russia remains the only nation that can erase the United States from the map in 30 minutes. As every president since John F. Kennedy has recognized, Russia’s cooperation is critical to averting nuclear war. Second, Russia is our most consequential partner in preventing nuclear terrorism. Through a combination of more than $11 billion in U.S. aid, provided through the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program, and impressive Russian professionalism, two decades after the collapse of the “evil empire,” not one nuclear weapon has been found loose. Third, Russia plays an essential role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and missile-delivery systems. As Washington seeks to stop Iran’s drive toward nuclear weapons, Russian choices to sell or withhold sensitive technologies are the difference between failure and the possibility of success. Fourth, Russian support in sharing intelligence and cooperating in operations remains essential to the U.S. war to destroy Al Qaeda and combat other transnational terrorist groups. Fifth, Russia provides a vital supply line to 100,000 U.S. troops fighting in Afghanistan. As U.S. relations with Pakistan have deteriorated, the Russian lifeline has grown ever more important and now accounts for half all daily deliveries. Sixth, Russia is the world’s largest oil producer and second largest gas producer. Over the past decade, Russia has added more oil and gas exports to world energy markets than any other nation. Most major energy transport routes from Eurasia start in Russia or cross its nine time zones. As citizens of a country that imports two of every three of the 20 million barrels of oil that fuel U.S. cars daily, Americans feel Russia’s impact at our gas pumps. Seventh, Moscow is an important player in today’s international system. It is no accident that Russia is one of the five veto-wielding, permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, as well as a member of the G-8 and G-20. A Moscow more closely aligned with U.S. goals would be significant in the balance of power to shape an environment in which China can emerge as a global power without overturning the existing order. Eighth, Russia is the largest country on Earth by land area, abutting China on the East, Poland in the West and the United States across the Arctic. This territory provides transit corridors for supplies to global markets whose stability is vital to the U.S. economy. Ninth, Russia’s brainpower is reflected in the fact that it has won more Nobel Prizes for science than all of Asia, places first in most math competitions and dominates the world chess masters list. The only way U.S. astronauts can now travel to and from the International Space Station is to hitch a ride on Russian rockets. The co-founder of the most advanced digital company in the world, Google, is Russian-born Sergei Brin. Tenth, Russia’s potential as a spoiler is difficult to exaggerate. Consider what a Russian president intent on frustrating U.S. international objectives could do — from stopping the supply flow to Afghanistan to selling S-300 air defense missiles to Tehran to joining China in preventing U.N. Security Council resolutions.
US-Russia Relations For nearly five decades, Washington and Moscow have engaged in negotiations to manage their nuclear competition. Those negotiations produced a string of acronyms—SALT, INF, START—for arms control agreements that strengthened strategic stability, reduced bloated nuclear arsenals and had a positive impact on the broader bilateral relationship. That is changing. The Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty is headed for demise. The New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START) has less than two years to run, and the administration of Donald Trump has yet to engage on Russian suggestions to extend it. Bilateral strategic stability talks have not been held in 18 months. On its current path, the U.S.-Russia nuclear arms control regime likely will come to an end in 2021. That will make for a strategic relationship that is less stable, less secure and less predictable and will further complicate an already troubled bilateral relationship. FIFTY YEARS OF ARMS CONTROL Bilateral nuclear arms control talks between Washington and Moscow began in 1969 with the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT). They resulted from a growing understanding that negotiated limits on the superpowers’ nuclear arms competition served the interests of both. Over the next five decades, arms control treaties and unilateral force decisions led the sides to reduce their active arsenals to 4,000-4,500 nuclear weapons each—down from a U.S. peak of more than 30,000 in the 1960s and a Soviet/Russian peak that exceeded 40,000 in the 1970s. Early treaties such as the 1972 Interim Offensive Agreement and the 1979 SALT II Treaty (which never entered into force but whose limits were observed into the mid-1980s) merely slowed the growth of nuclear arsenals. Later treaties had a more dramatic impact. The 1987 INF Treaty banned the entire class of U.S. and Soviet land-based missiles with ranges between 500 and 5,500 kilometers. The 1991 START Treaty required the sides to reduce their accountable strategic nuclear warheads by some 40 percent while cutting strategic missile launchers and bombers by about 30 percent. Arms control agreements often had a beneficial impact on the broader relationship. SALT helped advance détente in the early 1970s; progress on INF and START spurred an improvement in the overall U.S.-Soviet relationship in the late 1980s; and the relatively quick conclusion of New START gave a positive impulse to the Obama administration’s reset with Russia, even though the reset proved short-lived. Today, the U.S.-Russian relationship has hit its lowest point since the end of the Cold War. Arms control, or the looming collapse of arms control, rather than helping, may contribute to a further deterioration of relations. THE DEMISE OF THE INF TREATY The INF Treaty is on a death course. Russia violated the treaty by developing and deploying the 9M729, a prohibited intermediate-range cruise missile. Neither the Obama nor the Trump administration employed an effective strategy to persuade Moscow to return to compliance. On October 20, 2018, President Trump announced that the United States would terminate the treaty, surprising allies and administration officials alike. NATO subsequently backed the U.S. decision, though European officials privately grumbled about a fait accompli. In early February, U.S. officials stated that they had suspended U.S. treaty obligations and given Russia the required six months’ notice of the U.S. intention to withdraw from the agreement. Russia then suspended its treaty obligations. The United States could not remain forever in a treaty that Russia has violated. However, the way the Trump administration handled its departure amounted to diplomatic malpractice. Washington will get blamed for the treaty’s end. There was a smarter way. First, U.S. officials should have informed their European counterparts in early 2018 that the United States would have no choice in 12–24 months but to leave the treaty if Russia did not correct its violation and urge them to apply political heat on the Kremlin, including at the highest level. Russia’s intermediate-range missiles cannot reach the United States; they threaten Europe and Asia. Second, the U.S. military should have deployed conventionally armed air- and sea-launched cruise missiles to the European region to show that the Russian violation would not go unchallenged. Third, NATO should have begun a study of long-term countermeasures, with one option being deployment in Europe of a conventionally armed U.S. intermediate-range ballistic missile. While the Alliance likely could not have found consensus to adopt that option, discussing it would have reminded military leaders in Moscow how much they disliked the U.S. Pershing II, whose deployment in West Germany in the 1980s proved key to securing the INF Treaty. Fourth, U.S. officials should have indicated to their Russian counterparts that, if they addressed U.S. concerns about the 9M729 violation, the United States would consider ways to address Russian concerns that the Aegis Ashore missile defense facility in Romania could launch offensive missiles. Would such steps have brought Russia back into compliance? Perhaps not, but they certainly would have increased the odds. Even if they did not succeed, they would have positioned Washington far better with its allies and put it in a stronger position to lay blame for the treaty’s end where it belonged—on Russia. In the actual event, the Trump administration hardly tried. In January, Russian officials offered to exhibit the 9M729 to U.S. experts. U.S. officials could have taken that proposal and insisted on procedures for a meaningful exhibition. Instead, they flat out turned it down. Much of the problem on the American side may lie with National Security Advisor John Bolton. He generally disdains arms control agreements as constraining U.S. capabilities and options (which is true, but they also constrain Russian capabilities and options). He had previously called for U.S. withdrawal from the INF Treaty. Exhibitions of the 9M729 and Aegis Ashore facility could have opened a path to resolve each side’s compliance concerns, but Moscow and Washington have not shown the needed political will. It looks like the treaty will meet its demise in August. QUESTIONS ABOUT THE FUTURE OF NEW START In contrast to the INF Treaty, Russia has complied with the limits of the 2010 New START Treaty, which required reductions by each country to no more than 1,550 deployed strategic warheads and no more than 700 deployed strategic missiles and bombers by February 2018. The United States also met the limits, though Russian officials question the adequacy of measures the U.S. military took to remove some strategic systems from treaty accountability. New START by its terms will expire in February 2021, though the treaty allows extension for up to five years. Russian officials have proposed discussion of extension. In 2017, Trump administration officials said they would first have to complete the new nuclear posture review and see whether Russia met the February 2018 limits. Both of those boxes were checked more than a year ago. U.S. officials now say they are studying the question and see no rush. New START extension should be a no-brainer. New START extension should be a no-brainer. First, it would extend to 2026 the limits on Russian strategic forces and provide a mechanism to address new nuclear systems that the Russian military has under development. Second, extension would not affect U.S. strategic modernization plans, which the Pentagon designed to fit within New START’s limits. Third, extension would continue the flow of information that the U.S. military and intelligence community receive about Russian strategic forces from data exchanges, notifications and on-site inspections. That information lets the U.S. military make smarter decisions about how to equip and operate U.S. strategic forces. When asked about extension, however, Bolton has raised two alternatives: renegotiation of New START or a treaty modeled on the 2002 Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty (SORT). Neither holds much promise. Renegotiation would allow Washington to try to improve New START, perhaps with additional verification measures or expanded limits to capture nuclear weapons not now covered by the treaty. But Moscow would seek changes as well, starting with limits on missile defense and conventional strike systems, both of which are anathema to the Trump administration. Renegotiation would take a long time and have, at best, an uncertain prospect of success. As for the SORT model, SORT limited just warheads (though with no verification measures); it did not constrain strategic missiles and bombers. While Moscow accepted such an agreement in 2002, Russian officials since 2008 have made clear that a strategic arms control agreement must limit missiles and bombers, as does New START. Bolton opposed New START when the Senate discussed its ratification back in 2010. Neither Secretary of State Mike Pompeo nor Acting Secretary of Defense Patrick Shanahan seem to be advocates for the treaty. Although extension would be very much in the U.S. interest, the Trump administration appears inclined to let it expire. NO STRATEGIC STABILITY TALKS U.S. and Russian officials in the past have held strategic stability talks to take a broad look at developments that affect their strategic relationship. Such talks are useful, particularly when new developments, such as those in the cyber and space domains, emerge and when Russian nuclear doctrine has provoked concern in Washington and led to changes in the U.S. nuclear posture. Even if strategic stability talks do not spin off specific negotiations, they provide a venue for the sides to exchange views and better understand the concerns of the other. During the Trump administration, a one-day session of strategic stability talks took place in September 2017. As of March 2019, it has not agreed to a second meeting. AN UNSETTLING FUTURE The Kremlin now faces a White House that attaches as little priority to reducing arms as it does—perhaps less. For most of the five decades of U.S.-Soviet/Russian arms control negotiations, the American side took the lead. Moscow often struck a pose not of disinterest, but of less interest—likely for bargaining purposes. That is no longer the case. The Kremlin now faces a White House that attaches as little priority to reducing arms as it does—perhaps less. The U.S. President evinces no understanding of arms control, while his national security advisor apparently seeks to end it. With the INF Treaty all but dead, New START’s fate uncertain after 2021 and no sign of new initiatives on either side, arms control as practiced for some 50 years may be coming to an end or, at a minimum, to a pause. That occurs at a time when Russia and the United States have significant nuclear modernization programs underway. While the bulk of those programs aim primarily to replace old weapons with new ones, the sides are also developing nuclear capabilities that neither previously had in its arsenal. Economic constraints may limit an all-out arms race, but the strategic nuclear relationship seems headed for uncharted territory. The end of the U.S.-Russian nuclear arms control regime would have wider impacts. If the two nuclear superpowers no longer are reducing—and no longer limiting—their nuclear arms, what credibility will they have to insist that other countries, such as North Korea, forgo nuclear weapons or that third countries sanction proliferating states? Will China decide to adjust its nuclear posture and move from its current modest stockpile of under 300 weapons toward a larger and more diverse arsenal? The current course will lead to a less stable and secure world. The United States and Russia will be less able to predict future developments on the other side and thus will have to make expensive worst-case assumptions. It will make for a more complex and dangerous relationship. Perhaps then they will recall the lessons of the 1960s and 1980s that arms control, however imperfect, can offer a useful tool for managing great power competition.
Russia and the United States seem determined to provoke each other by adopting highly intrusive policies in the opposing country’s geopolitical neighborhood. The latest incident is Moscow’s decision to send two nuclear-capable bombers to Venezuela to show support for Nicolas Maduro’s leftist regime. Russian defense minister Sergei Shoigu said during a meeting with his Venezuelan counterpart Vladimir Padrino Lopez that Russia would continue to send military aircraft and warships to visit Venezuela as part of continuing bilateral military cooperation. Not surprisingly, Washington is unhappy about Moscow’s move. The Trump administration increasingly is concerned about the Maduro regime’s ugly authoritarianism, the meltdown of the Venezuelan economy and the massive refugee flow it has created, and the mounting tensions between Caracas and several neighbors, especially Colombia. Even before the latest episodes of turbulence, Barack Obama’s administration declared Venezuela to be a national security threat to the United States. The last thing U.S. officials want to see is Russia fishing in such troubled political waters. Russia’s cooperation with Venezuela has grown markedly since tensions between Moscow and Washington flared in 2008 over Russia’s war with Georgia. A Russian general even spoke of the possibility of his country acquiring a military base in Venezuela. While civilian leaders in both Caracas and Moscow disavowed such intentions, Russian naval forces soon conducted joint maneuvers with Venezuelan units, and there was a proliferation of arms sales. In 2012, the Venezuelan government announced a $4 billion “loan” from Russia to purchase tanks, air-defense missiles, and other hardware. The bilateral political and security relationship has grown steadily closer since then. There are multiple signs of greater Russian activism throughout Latin America over the past few years. Moscow has revitalized its political and military ties with Cuba’s communist government. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the new, non-communist Russia markedly reduced both its political and economic support to Havana. But Vladimir Putin’s government has reversed that policy, and Moscow is once again a major backer. In addition, the Kremlin is far more active in promoting ties with Brazil, Argentina and other major Latin American countries. And those initiatives are not confined to economics and diplomacy; they have a military dimension as well. Washington’s failure to enforce the Monroe Doctrine during the Cold War when the Soviet Union made Cuba into a client state and military outpost has not encouraged respect for that doctrine in the post-Cold War era. The Trump administration needs to adopt a firmer policy toward Moscow’s intrusions into Latin America. At the same time, U.S. leaders must recognize that U.S. policy has been clumsy and provocative toward Russia’s interests in Eastern Europe, especially regarding Ukraine. Washington needs to adopt a new approach that respects Moscow’s implicit version of a Monroe Doctrine. By pushing NATO expansion right to the borders of the Russian Federation, the United States needlessly antagonized a newly democratic Russia and eventually created a new cold war. The administrations of Bill Clinton and George W. Bush also trampled on Moscow’s long standing political and diplomatic interests in the Balkans by intervening militarily against Russia’s ally, Serbia. Worst of all, the Obama administration interfered egregiously in Ukraine’s internal affairs to help demonstrators oust the elected, pro-Russian government in 2014. That move constituted contempt not only for a Russian sphere of influence, but Moscow’s core security buffer.
Russia has routinely engaged in operations in the gray zone—the space between overt military conflict and normal peacetime competition—in furtherance of its revisionist aims. While these actions have been most readily apparent in Russia’s near abroad, their reach is in fact global. Nonetheless, the ways in which Russia exerts itself in areas farther afield, where it cannot effectively project military force and/or leverage ethnically Russian local populations, are distinct. This contribution begins by explaining why Russia would be interested in intervening in Colombia, given its extremely close security and economic relations with the US, as well as its desire to retaliate against the US for its perceived meddling in Russia’s traditional sphere of influence (e.g. Ukraine). It then examines how Russia may shift from tacitly supporting Colombia’s FARC insurgents on the battlefield to exploiting fissures relating to the peace process at the ballot box. Introduction In recent years, Russia has routinely engaged in operations in the gray zone – the space between overt military conflict and normal peace time competition – in furtherance of its revisionist aims. These actions have been most readily apparent in Russia’s near abroad. For example, in 2014, Russia skillfully leveraged all elements of national power to quickly annex Crimea, while also engaging in a less well executed campaign in Donbas, eastern Ukraine (Vasilyeva, 2018). Nevertheless, these activities are not limited to Russia’s traditional sphere of influence. For example, Russia also attempted to sway public opinion and otherwise influence the outcome of pivotal elections throughout Western European and North American democracies. These attempts have included attempts to compromise electronic voting systems, as well as sophisticated disinformation campaigns (DiResta, et al., 2018). Electoral meddling offers Russia an inexpensive way to effectively impose asymmetric costs in parts of the world where Russia cannot a) effectively project military force or b) leverage the support of large ethnically Russian and potentially supportive local populations. Indeed, Russia’s disinformation campaign to influence the 2016 US presidential election clearly explicates this point. Irrespective of if (or to what extent) Russian efforts swayed the outcome of the election, they undoubtedly had (and continue to have) a strong psychological impact on American voters and have generated significant political controversy (DiResta, et al., 2018). Beyond targeting the US and Western European democracies, Russia has strong incentives to pursue similar campaigns in Latin America. By asserting its presence in a historically US-dominated area, Russia’s influence campaigns fit into its overall strategy of reducing America’s global influence and creating a more multipolar international paradigm. Indeed, the former Commander of US Southern Command, General John Kelly (2015) testified before Congress, that Russia is “attempt[ing] to erode US leadership and challenge US influence in the Western Hemisphere” (p. 8-9). It may also be the case that Russia is incentivized to meddle in Latin American affairs as retribution for US involvement in Eastern Europe, and particularly in Ukraine. To this end, the Director General of the Russian Koven and Kamp 124 International Affairs Council, Andrey Kortunov, recently stated, “that if you mess in our backyard, you should keep in mind that we can mess in your backyard as well” (“On GPS,” 2019). We have also already seen Russian efforts to influence the outcomes of Mexico’s 2018 elections. Mexico’s 2018 election was one of the largest elections in Mexican history, with over 3,400 positions open at the federal, state and local levels (Ngo, 2018). In the presidential race, the Russian campaign favored Andrés Manuel López Obrador – commonly known by his initials, AMLO – a leftist candidate who made comments perceived as anti-American during the primary. US officials raised concerns about the potential for disinformation and hacking of the election by nefarious actors. Former National Security Advisor, Lieutenant General H.R. McMaster is quoted as stating, “we’ve seen this really sophisticated effort to polarize democratic societies…You’ve seen actually initial signs of it in the Mexican presidential campaign already” (Richardson, 2018). In the run-up to the election, bots and trolls circulated disinformation – such as the rumor that Mexican citizens would have to reregister to vote in the elections – on social media networks. Russian media, such as RT, ran extensive content that was highly favorable for AMLO in the months preceding the election (Ghitis, 2018). While AMLO won the presidency by a 30-point margin, this outcome was likely more a reflection of voters’ discontent with record levels of violence and corruption versus Russian meddling (Ribando Seelke and Gracia, 2018; Ngo, 2018). Nevertheless, Mexico was an extremely logical target for Russia given that it is the US’s second-largest export market, third-largest trading partner, and one of its most important regional security partners, to say nothing of the border that the two states share. Should we expect similar meddling in Colombia? Colombia Since the start of Plan Colombia in 1999, the US and Colombia have maintained an exceedingly close partnership. Indeed, Colombia is considered the hallmark of US efforts to build partner capacity (Ramsey, 2009). So much so that the US has leveraged Colombian trainers and Colombian facilities to build partner capacity in dozens of third countries, a process known as triangulated security cooperation (Tickner, 2014, p. 1). Moreover, the US and Colombia maintain close economic ties. Consequently, it is not surprising that Russia has historically tried to exert influence in Colombia. Previously, Russia pursued influence in Colombia through at least tacit, indirect support to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia; FARC). The FARC emerged in 1964 and rose to become Colombia’s largest Marxist-Leninist insurgency. At its height, the FARC numbered just under 21,000 armed combatants and controlled approximately 40 percent of Colombian territory – an area roughly the size of Switzerland (McCaughan, 2001; Universidad Militar Nueva Granada, 2010). Russian arms dealers provided extensive support to the FARC. Indeed, perhaps the world’s most famous arms dealer, Viktor Anatolyevich Bout, was arrested as part of a US Drug Enforcement Agency undercover operation launched after learning that the FARC was seeking to acquire Russian made surface-to-air missiles (Falconer, 2008). Following the operation, Russian Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov publicly intervened to declare Bout’s innocence and to attempt to prevent his extradition to the US. Bout was previously involved in a high profile case wherein Peruvian military aircraft were used to airdrop 10,000 Kalashnikov’s into FARC controlled territory in the Colombian jungle (Graham, 2011). Unfortunately for Russia, continuing to – at least tacitly support – arming the FARC is no longer an option. In 2016, after years of trying negotiations, the FARC and the government of Colombia reached a peace agreement. That said, the peace deal has generated fissures in Colombian politics, which can be easily exploited by Russian disinformation campaigns. First, the public referendum on the peace accord failed by a razor thin margin (49.8% in favor, 50.2% opposed). This was principally due to Koven and Kamp 125 concerns regarding the extremely weak nature of the transitional justice regime and the fact that former FARC fighters would not only be allowed to run for political office, but would in fact be guaranteed seats in Colombia’s congress (Koven, 2016). The former Commanding General of the Peruvian Army, Otto Guibovich, who has studied the issue closely, pontificated that the FARC had managed to reverse Clausewitz’ oft cited quote that “war is the continuation of politics by other means,” noting that “politics would be the continuation of their [the FARC’s] war through other means that begin with congressmen and delegates in the parliament” (O. Guibovich, interview with author, October, 17, 2016). A minimally revised agreement was ultimately ratified not by the Colombian people but by the legislature and supreme court. The divisive nature of the peace process affords Russia three avenues for continued leverage in Colombia. First, electoral meddling in support of the FARC’s political ambitions. Indeed, former US defense officials suggested that Russia did attempt to meddle in Colombia’s 2018 elections. Moreover, in January 2018, then-Colombian president, Juan Manuel Santos stated that Colombia was preparing for cyberattacks from abroad related to the elections (El Colombiano, 2018). Before the Congressional elections in March 2018, Colombian Defense Minister Luis Carlos Villegas announced that four cyberattacks aimed to shut down Colombia’s National Voter Registry (DW, 2018). Colombian intelligence agencies also documented almost 60,000 attacks against the National Civil Registry Website, the agency responsible for identifying and issuing identification documents to Colombian citizens. Another potential avenue for providing electoral support to the FARC is misinformation. To this end, Russia Today en Español (RT) launched in 2009 and Sputnik media launched a Spanish channel in 2014. One source estimates that RT and Sputnik have region-wide media penetration (Fonseca, 2018). For example, RT alone maintains agreements with well over 300 cable TV providers in the region (ibid.; Farah & Eustacia Reyes, 2016). Second, and relatedly, even if the aim is not specifically to advance the political plight of the FARC, the divisive nature of the peace process continues to be a key campaign issue. Russian can use its media penetration and social media presence for disinformation campaigns designed to keep these divisive narratives at the forefront during future Colombian elections. Third, the new administration of President Iván Duque vowed that it would modify the peace deal. Whether or not it is able to do so remains to be seen, but even slow-rolling implementation – which is certainly possible – could undermine the agreement (Felbab-Brown, 2018). Doing so would incentivize thousands of former FARC fighters to again take up arms. It is already the case that the FARC’s 1st Front vowed not to demobilize and to continue the fight (Koven, 2016). In addition, Colombia’s last remaining leftist insurgency, the National Liberation Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional or ELN), as well as transnational criminal organizations, such as the First Capital Command are eager to welcome former FARC guerrillas into their ranks. If the peace fails dramatically, Russia could always return to tacitly supporting the provision of weapons and other material support to Colombian subversives.
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - As the United States makes its biggest diplomatic push in Latin America in years to try to oust Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro, the U.S. military is zeroing in on a byproduct of the crisis: a strengthening of Colombian rebels on both sides of Venezuela’s border. U.S. Admiral Craig Faller, the head of the U.S. military’s Southern Command that oversees U.S. forces in Latin America, told Reuters the United States had sharpened its focus on the rebels and increased its sharing of intelligence with Colombian officials. U.S. officials see a growing threat from both Colombia’s National Liberation Army (ELN) and factions of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) that refuse to adhere to a 2016 peace agreement to end five decades of civil war. The United States believes the rebels are taking advantage of Venezuela’s crisis to expand their reach in that country and the scope of long-standing illegal activities, including drug trafficking. “Our principal role working with our Colombian partners is to assist in intelligence sharing. What we know, we share,” Faller said. Asked whether the intelligence sharing on the rebels had ramped up as Venezuela’s crisis deepened, Faller responded: “Absolutely.” The risks from the insurgents on both sides of the Colombia-Venezuela border add another layer of complexity to the crisis in Venezuela, where U.S. President Donald Trump says all options are on the table to remove Maduro from office. U.S. officials have uniformly emphasized diplomatic and economic tools to accelerate Maduro’s departure, like sanctions, but Faller acknowledged the U.S. military stood ready to provide options if needed. At the same time, he noted that no U.S. allies in the region were seeking a military solution to the crisis in Venezuela. “My job is to be ready, be on the balls of my feet, at all times. But we’ve been talking to our partners and no one, no one, thinks that a military option is a good idea,” Faller said. Opposition leader Juan Guaido says the May 2018 vote in which Maduro won a second term was a sham and he invoked a constitutional provision on Jan. 23 to assume the interim presidency. Most Western nations including the United States have backed Guaido as head of state. Maduro, a socialist who has denounced Guaido as a U.S. puppet seeking to foment a coup, retains the support of the armed forces and control of state functions. Jeremy McDermott, a Colombia-based expert on the insurgencies and co-founder of the Insight Crime think tank, said he believed the Colombian insurgents were operating in Venezuela with at least the blessing of Maduro. The rebels’ aim is to exploit Venezuela’s lawlessness for safe haven and for economic gain, he said. But he noted there could be an added benefit for Maduro. “If the Americans invade, or if Colombia promotes a military intervention, then they (Maduro’s supporters) would be able to call upon an insurgent force with more than 50 years of combat experience,” McDermott said. Asked whether the United States had any evidence of communications between Maduro and the guerrilla groups, Faller said: “I’d rather not discuss the details of the exact connections but we’re watching it very closely.” Venezuela’s Information Ministry and ELN contacts did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Colombia’s ambassador to Washington, former Vice President Francisco Santos, said ELN and FARC factions had long been present in Venezuela but had grown stronger and more integrated into the country as a result of Venezuela’s crisis. “They have become the paramilitary groups of the Maduro administration,” Santos told Reuters. ELN EXPANSION A Cuba-inspired Marxist insurgency formed in 1964, the ELN claimed responsibility for a January car bomb attack against a police academy in Bogota that killed 22 cadets. It was an escalation by insurgents who have kidnapped Colombian security forces, attacked police stations and bombed oil pipelines. U.S. officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, say the ELN is increasingly using Venezuelan territory to carry out narco-trafficking and illegal mining of minerals like gold and coltan. The Venezuelan security forces were believed to be getting kickbacks from the guerrillas, they said. One U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the U.S. collection of intelligence on the guerrilla groups had increased in recent weeks, including looking at the militants’ activities on the Venezuelan side of the border with Colombia. Several U.S. officials said they believed senior leaders of both the ELN and the so-called FARC dissidents who do not adhere to the peace agreement were now located inside of Venezuela. “Their leadership is there,” a second U.S. official said, who also declined to be named, without providing evidence. An International Crisis Group report cited estimates that the ELN had been active in a minimum of 13 of Venezuela’s 24 states, “absorbing new recruits and shifting from a guerrilla force that embraced armed resistance against Colombia’s ruling elites to one with many core operations in Venezuela.” Opposition lawmakers in Venezuela also regularly denounce growing ELN activities in Venezuela, but Reuters has been unable to independently verify the extent of its presence or its operations. Faller declined to discuss any specifics about the collection of U.S. intelligence or identify which insurgent leaders were in Venezuela. But he acknowledged the trend and added that the flow of illegal narcotics “from Colombia into Venezuela, and then from Venezuela out in the region, has risen as the misery of the Venezuelan people has risen.” “It’s essentially a lawless region now inside Venezuela along the border and the FARC dissidents and the ELN have taken advantage of that,” Faller said, adding: “They operate with impunity inside Venezuela.” Santos said the big concern for Colombia was that the strengthening rebel forces would upend efforts to crack down on narcotics trafficking. “That’s a big worry because in this situation of chaos, obviously they are going to grow. They are growing,” he said.
Colombian police have created the first counter-nuclear arms unit in the region dealing with leftist rebels. The new Centre for Nuclear Security will try to prevent members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc) from obtaining nuclear material to make a "dirty bomb". Intelligence officials say computers belonging to the Farc proved they had been trying to obtain nuclear material. They believe the rebels intend to use the material to cause maximum damage. Since 2008, when the Colombian army found several computers belonging to the slain Farc commander known as "Raul Reyes", the authorities have been working on a theory that the guerrillas have ambitions involving nuclear arms. At a news conference in Bogota, the new head of the unit, Gen Rafael Parra, said emails found on the computers proved that since 2005 the Farc had been trying to buy nuclear material in Ukraine. Venezuelan nuclear ambitions "It's clearly the intention of the Farc to obtain uranium in Europe. It's obvious that if it tries to do this, then it's for the sole purpose of using it against the people it has been terrorising for years," Gen Parra told reporters. The inauguration of the centre comes just days after Colombia's neighbour Venezuela signed a contract with Moscow for a new nuclear reactor.
After Colombia’s government signed a peace deal with the country’s main rebel group, ending decades of war and upheaval, both sides said it heralded a new era. But two and a half years after the militants agreed to lay down their arms, many of the promises made are not being honored, and the prospect of a true, lasting peace now seems far from certain. This is what we found: As many as 3,000 militants have resumed fighting, threatening the very foundation of the accord. Many of the millions of Colombians who once lived in rebel-held territory still await the promised arrival of roads, schools and electricity. The government’s pledge to help rural areas was a big reason the rebels stood down. Since the peace deal was signed, at least 500 activists and community leaders have been killed, and more than 210,000 people displaced from their homes amid the continuing violence. That undercuts a core selling point of the deal: that it would bring safety and stability. Colombia’s new president, Iván Duque, a conservative who took office in August, has expressed skepticism of the accords and wants to change a commitment that was fundamental to the rebels agreeing to lay down their weapons. The Path to Peace Colombia’s five-decade civil war took at least 220,000 lives and devastated large swaths of the countryside. In rebel-held areas, government services disappeared and the infrastructure crumbled. Many turned to the drug economy to survive. All sides were accused of atrocities — kidnappings, rapes and summary executions — that bred deep-seated animosities across the country and even within families. In a war so deeply personal, finding a way out posed an enormous challenge. So when the government and the largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known as the FARC, reached a peace agreement in September 2016 after years of negotiation, much of the world applauded. Juan Manuel Santos, then Colombia’s president, won the Nobel Peace Prize. But peace deals of this scope are never easy to implement, and Colombians knew a long, daunting path was ahead of them. The deal the two sides reached was ambitious and complex — with 578 separate stipulations — but it can be boiled down to a few core promises. A primary goal of the FARC insurgency was improving the lives of rural Colombians. The deal calls for “universal” education in rural areas for preschool through secondary school; guaranteed access to drinking water; and heavy subsidies for development programs in former rebel territories. The rebels, in turn, would cease all hostilities, turn in their weapons to the United Nations and return to civilian life. The FARC would be allowed to compete in elections and was guaranteed 10 seats in Congress. [The head of Colombia’s army has ordered increased attacks on criminals and rebel groups.] Raised Hopes, and Dashed Ones Much of the war was fought in the countryside. The peace agreement raised hopes that the rural deprivation that fueled the conflict might finally ease. But two years after the accord was signed, a visit to the town of Juan José made clear that little has changed. The community of 8,000 has not received even the most basic services it was promised. With no running water, residents are still forced to rely on untreated wells. No schools have been built in the surrounding villages, despite government pledges, and many children have never seen the inside of a classroom. While the police are now in Juan José, neither they nor the military have made it to the nearby villages, and new armed groups have moved in to fill the vacuum left by the FARC. Emilio Archila, an adviser to the government, said many of the biggest development promises in the agreement — such as delivering water and electricity — would take more than a decade to accomplish, given the damage the countryside suffered from the conflict. “Anyone who thinks we could solve these issues in two years doesn’t understand the magnitude of the problem,” he said. But Adam Isacson, an analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America, a human rights group, said the government had failed to act. “The government had a window of opportunity to establish the state in lands the rebels gave up, but it didn’t take that chance,” he said. “Now there are many groups fighting for the same territory.” Money is a major obstacle to meeting all the promises. When the peace deal was signed, the estimate was that it would cost about $45 billion to fulfill all the promises over a period of at least 15 years. At the time, the government enjoyed revenue from a state oil company whose output was going for almost $100 a barrel. Now, prices are a third lower. For Farmers, Coca Is Still King Much of the FARC’s funding came through the drug trade. But peace did little to make farmers rethink their business model: Last year, the amount of land used for coca leaf production reached an all-time high. Part of the problem is that the appeal of the lucrative cocaine business is as strong to the armed groups that have swept into rural areas as it once was to the FARC. But the government also bears much of the blame. The crop-substitution program agreed to in the peace deal promised cash payments to those who uprooted their coca plants and replaced them with legal crops. But in Juan José, residents say the payments to farmers ceased for a time after President Duque took charge. They eventually resumed at the end of the year, but the officials who were supposed to introduce the alternative crops never arrived. So many farmers have gone back to planting coca. A Pushback Against Leniency A central pillar of the accords was a promise to seek the truth of what happened during the conflict, with the goal of national reconciliation. The deal established the so-called Special Jurisdiction for Peace — tribunals to hear accounts of crimes and abuses. Ten thousand former rebels and 2,000 members of the armed forces pledged to testify under a broad blanket of immunity: Blame could be assigned, but no jail time would be handed out, except for a few select crimes. That part of the peace deal, however, was a tough sell for many Colombians. In October 2016, when they were given a chance to weigh in on the accord, they shocked many by voting against it in a referendum. Mr. Santos sidestepped voters with a revised deal that he sent straight to Congress. Now, Mr. Duque has requested an overhaul of the tribunals, calling them too lenient. Some worry he hopes to dismantle them entirely. But the no-jail pledge was critical to getting the FARC to sign the deal. Reneging on it might well be seen as a bait and switch. And that could be a deal breaker. “The ability to get a lighter sentence and participate in politics is what convinced the FARC to get into politics to begin with,” said Mr. Isacson, the human rights analyst. Steps Forward, but Only a Few Some of the promises made in the peace accords have been kept. More than 6,804 FARC fighters did initially disarm, and more than 8,994 weapons were surrendered. By 2017, the FARC had completely demobilized, except for a small dissident group. About 23 percent of the 578 provisions in the deal have been fully carried out, according to a recent study by the Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at the University of Notre Dame, which is monitoring the accords. But the study projected that despite the “steady progress,” only one-third of the commitments made in the deal would be met in the agreed-upon time frame. The rest, it said, were either in a “state of minimal implementation” or had not yet even been touched. “It’s undeniable that the government hasn’t made good on its promises, whether it’s reintegrating former fighters, agrarian development or political reforms,” said Julián Gallo Cubillos, a former FARC commander who is now a Colombian senator. “There’s been a general neglect.” One of the biggest failures has come on the security front, which government officials and rebels alike assured skeptical Colombians would be the largest dividend of the peace deal. In many areas where the FARC has disarmed, the government has yet to arrive in force, breaking a key promise of the accords. The resulting lawlessness and disorder in rural areas have proved deadly for Colombian activists, 252 of whom were killed last year, up from 191 in 2017, according to Colombia’s Institute of Studies for Peace and Development. The FARC said this month that 130 of its former fighters had been killed since the signing of the peace deal. The ex-rebels have repeatedly complained that demobilizing has left them defenseless against the paramilitary gangs still roaming the countryside. This has led to a major setback for peace: Experts estimate that as many as 3,000 militants have taken up arms again — a figure equal to more than 40 percent of those who initially demobilized. It includes new recruits. Things have also not gone well on the political front. FARC leaders did form a party to participate in elections, but they soon learned that military victories can be easier than political ones. Unpopular for their history of kidnappings and killings, they were attacked with stones on the campaign trail, dropped out of a presidential bid and did not win a single elected seat. The optimism that peace was around the corner thanks to the deal Mr. Santos signed has faded among people like Andrés Chica, a farmer who lives near Juan José but now fears heading into town. “What he sold us was a dream,” said Mr. Chica. The Takeaway: Peace deals are hard. Peace is harder.
There is a direct link between terrorism and international illicit drug markets. UNODC Senior Terrorism Prevention Officer Irka Kuleshnyk said, “While it is difficult to establish how widely terrorist groups are involved in the illicit drug trade, or the breadth and nature of cooperation between these two criminal groups, the magnitude of the numbers involved make the relationship worrisome.”[1] According to the UNODC’s World Drug Report 2007, the total potential value of Afghanistan’s 2006 opium harvest accruing to farmers, laboratory owners and Afghan traffickers reached about $3.1 billion dollars.[2] In addition, it is reported that in 2004, some 400 tons of cocaine was exported from one Latin American country, with an estimated domestic value of US$ 2 billion.[3] The UNODC reports that the international drug trade is a $400 billion dollar business worldwide.[4] Out of the 43 Foreign Terror Organizations, the Drug Enforcement Agency reports that 60 percent of all FTOs are linked to the drug trafficking business.[5] This paper will discuss the nexus and potential responses to the issues surrounding the colliding worlds of drug trafficking and international terrorism. Terrorist organizations may be related to drug trafficking either through direct involvement in both activities or through a “marriage of convenience.” There are two principal ways terrorist groups benefit from trafficking narcotics. First, some terrorist organizations tax the drug traffickers and farmers directly. The relationship is sometimes referred to as a “marriage of convenience.”[6] Terrorists that control regions where illicit drugs are grown will place a tariff on drug traffickers.[7] The terrorists benefit by receiving cash and weaken their enemies by funding their societies with addictive drugs.[8] However, the “marriage” is beneficial to both parties.[9] Drug traffickers benefit from the benefit from the terrorists’ military skills, weapons supply, and access to other clandestine organizations.[10] Further, drug traffickers may gain freedom of movement and protection when they operate together with terrorists who control large amounts of territory.[11] Both groups benefit from the destabilization of society that spurs the growth of terrorism and drug trafficking.[12] Second, like the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), terrorist groups are drug traffickers themselves. Their main objective is to overthrow the established order in Colombia and replace it with a socialist dictatorship.[13] In its attempts to destabilize the legitimate Government of Colombia, the FARC employs terrorist methods such as bombings, extortions, selective assassinations, kidnappings, and armed confrontations with Colombian police and military forces.[14] In order to finance their political agenda, FARC uses drug trafficking profits as their principal source of funding.[15] Much of their agenda is based upon protecting and exploiting drug trafficking operations in Colombia and the region.[16] As evidenced by this example, the world of terrorism and drug trafficking go hand in hand. There is no better example to illustrate the nexus between these two worlds than Hezbollah’s presence in the tri-border area (TBA) in South America.[17] Hezbollah takes advantage of the hundreds of clandestine airstrips and lax border security in Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina.[18] In turn, proceeds gained from drug trafficking is laundered and deposited back to Iran, which funds Hezbollah, or Hezbollah directly in the Middle East.[19] Religious views on drugs add an interesting aspect to drugs trafficking and terrorism. For example, at one point the Taliban forbid growing poppy began to realize the substantial profit they could make off opiates.[20] The Taliban uses their profits from the opium trade to buy weapons, food, and other necessary items to support their insurgency in Afghanistan.[21] However, profit is not the only motivation for the Taliban to grow opiates. Khan Mohammed, a Taliban associate who was convicted and sentenced to life in prison in 2008 under narco-terrorism statutes, told an Afghan farmer, “…[m]ay God turn all the infidels into dead corpses…whether it is by opium or by shooting, this is our common goal.”[22] Another interesting aspect in the colliding worlds of drugs and terror is the use of the cultivated or manufactured drug by the terrorists themselves. After Iraqi security forces reclaimed the city of Mosul, US Army Colonel Ryan Dillon said there was evidence of amphetamine use among ISIS soldiers.[23] Track marks were found on ISIS soldiers were determined to be from intravenous amphetamine use that allowed soldiers to stay alert during battle.[24]
Russia is working to expand its presence in Latin America, largely at Washington’s expense, and 2018 presents it with many opportunities to do so. Five Latin American countries—Cuba, Venezuela, Colombia, Mexico, and Brazil—are going through political transitions this year with multiple openings for Russia to meddle. Souring attitudes toward the United States throughout the region over trade and immigration issues, the rise of populist candidates, and the deepening internal economic and social challenges facing many Latin American countries create favorable circumstances for Russia to advance its interests. Capitalizing on opportunities to gain a foothold in Latin America is a familiar strategy for Russia. As White House Chief of Staff John Kelly testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee in March 2015 in his capacity as head of the U.S. Southern Command, the arm of the U.S. military responsible for operations in Central and South America: Periodically since 2008, Russia has pursued an increased presence in Latin America through propaganda, military arms and equipment sales, counterdrug agreements, and trade. Under President [Vladimir] Putin, however, we have seen a clear return to Cold War-tactics. As part of its global strategy, Russia is using power projection in an attempt to erode U.S. leadership and challenge U.S. influence in the Western Hemisphere. Putin will want to be well positioned to spotlight his Latin American ties for the upcoming G20 summit, scheduled for November 30–December 1 in Buenos Aires, Argentina—the first of these to be hosted in South America. For Moscow, this event will be one way to push back against the outcry and diplomatic isolation from Western governments after the March 2018 poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal in the United Kingdom and the April 2018 chemical weapons attack in Syria. Putin is likely to tout his relationships with Latin American leaders—such as the strategic partnership agreement he signed earlier this year with Argentinian President Mauricio Macri—to avoid a repeat of the chilly reception that he received at the 2014 G20 summit in Australia after Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea. RUSSIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER PUTIN For much of the post–Cold War era, the United States and Europe paid little attention to Russia’s efforts to expand its political, economic, and military influence abroad. The Soviet Union’s dissolution, Russia’s internal challenges, and Moscow’s stated desire for integration with the West sharply constrained the Kremlin’s interest and capacity to project its influence on a global scale and diminished the West’s interest in Russia’s foreign policy and global activities. The West saw these efforts as primarily confined to Russia’s immediate neighborhood and largely ineffective elsewhere. However, since Vladimir Putin’s return to the presidency in 2012, Russia has engaged in a broad and surprisingly effective campaign to expand its global reach. His reelection in March 2018 is likely to see this campaign continue. To advance Russian objectives, Moscow has relied on a wide array of diplomatic, military, intelligence, cyber, trade, energy, and financial tools to influence political systems, public attitudes, and elite decisionmakers in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Asia, and Latin America. These objectives—as outlined in the 2017 Carnegie paper “The Return of Global Russia: An Analytical Framework”—include, primarily, undermining the U.S.-led liberal international order and the West’s cohesion; enhancing Putin’s domestic legitimacy by demonstrating Russia’s status as a global power; and promoting specific Russian commercial, military, and energy interests.1 Russian activity in Latin America has not received nearly the same attention as Russian meddling in the former Soviet space, Europe, or the United States, where its impact is far more visible and wide-ranging. Yet Moscow may view its gains in Central and South America as payback for what it has viewed as U.S. interference in Russia’s backyard. How effectively can Moscow expand its fairly limited standing in the region beyond long-standing ties with Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela? Can it significantly complicate U.S. relationships with partners such as Mexico, Colombia, Brazil, and Argentina? Will it be able to degrade the United States’ image and reputation in the region? For the United States, Russia’s increasing presence in the Western Hemisphere is an unwelcome factor that can further roil relations with its southern neighbors and could present new military and security threats. Russia is active in Latin America primarily through arms sales, commercial agreements, and high-level political outreach. While these activities are driven largely by financial incentives, Putin’s motivation to boost Russia’s profile is also firmly rooted in geopolitics. Moscow has looked to develop partnerships with countries that share an interest in creating institutions and relationships that are not dominated by the United States or Europe. It has cultivated a relationship with Brazil through the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) group, for example. Moscow has also sought to deepen ties with allies that share the Kremlin’s increasingly authoritarian approach to governance and resentment of U.S. global leadership, such as Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega, Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro, and Bolivian President Evo Morales. More recently, Moscow’s efforts have sought to take advantage of U.S. policy shifts that have created tensions in some countries’ relations with the United States. U.S. President Donald Trump’s administration has sharply criticized Mexico’s stance on NAFTA and has called for a crackdown on immigration from Latin America. The administration threatened the Maduro government with military force in 2017 and has imposed increasingly severe financial sanctions to encourage a political deal between the Venezuelan regime and its opponents. Moscow appears poised to capitalize on these tensions in 2018 and to manipulate the environment to its advantage. RUSSIA’S AGENDA As Russia looks to take advantage of opportunities in Latin America, it will remain focused on three key areas of interest: alliances, trade, and security. ALLIANCES AND RELATIONSHIPS Russia is looking to develop a presence in all corners of the globe to solidify its image as a world power. It also seeks to build relationships and create institutions that further its aim of creating a multipolar world. Moscow has almost certainly taken note of the many Central and South American nations that have sought to assert their foreign policy independence and have not consistently aligned themselves with the United States. For example, the Rio Group denounced the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia.2 In 2003, Chile and Mexico indicated they would vote against the draft UN resolution for military action in Iraq. In 2014, Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela voted against the resolution condemning Russia’s action in Crimea. This year, less than half of member heads of state attended the Summit of the Americas in Lima, Peru. Such a decline in enthusiasm for an event that has long been an opportunity for the United States to showcase its leadership among American nations probably provides further incentive for Moscow to continue building bridges with the region. TRADE AND INVESTMENT Starting from a very low base, Russia stands to gain economically by expanding its trade and investment relationships in the region, particularly in the face of U.S. and European sanctions. Although total trade between Russia and the Latin American and Caribbean region was only $12 billion in 2016, it has increased by 44 percent since 2006, with Brazil and Mexico representing about 50 percent of all Russian trade with the region. During this period, Russian firms have made significant investments in the oil and gas sector in countries such as Bolivia, Mexico, and Venezuela. The broader economic relationship with Latin America remains subdued due to Russia’s overall economic decline. MILITARY POWER PROJECTION Moscow probably calculates that close relations—whether built around arms sales, trade or energy deals, or similar political views—will translate into physical access for Russian military and security activities. Access to ports and airfields enables Moscow to deploy military assets to the region, projecting its power and messaging the United States. After the Georgian war in August 2008, for example, Russia sent ships on port visits to the Caribbean and Venezuela and flew bombers on long-range patrols. Although Moscow claimed these exercises had been long planned, they were well timed to message its displeasure with Washington’s support for the Georgian government, which had included sending U.S. ships to the Black Sea. Amid worsening tensions with the United States, Russia has opened facilities in Nicaragua ostensibly for counternarcotics-related activities, and Russian officials have spoken periodically about potentially reopening an intelligence collection facility in Lourdes, Cuba, that was shuttered in 2001. Such efforts, at a minimum, serve as a reminder that Moscow could expand its military and security footprint in the Western Hemisphere to counter or pressure the United States militarily. THE CHINA FACTOR Russia’s engagement in Latin America should be seen in the context of China’s growing role there. While the United States remains the region’s most significant trade partner, trade with China is rising rapidly. Total trade between China and Latin America from 2006 to 2016 increased by more than 200 percent, compared to a 38 percent increase in trade between the United States and Latin America. Russia’s role as a trading partner is demonstrably smaller (see figure 1). China has been a steady importer of Latin American commodities, but in recent years its activity in the region—as elsewhere in the world—has expanded to include infrastructure investment. In Ecuador, for example, China built a massive hydroelectric plant that provides 35 percent of the country’s energy. China has also built two nuclear power plants in Argentina, a 152-mile-long motorway in Colombia, and a container port in northern Brazil. China holds a 23-percent stake in Brazil’s third-largest energy firm. China has not only harnessed its economic power to rival the United States, but it has also pushed initiatives, such as the promotion of educational exchanges and cultural activities as outlined extensively in the National Endowment for Democracy’s “Sharp Power” report. China is both an ally and a competitor to Russia’s agenda in the region. The two countries share an interest in eroding U.S. hegemony in Latin America, but they compete in some spheres, such as arms sales and rights to oil fields. Although Moscow does not have the resources to match China as an economic actor in Latin America, it has been able to leverage other instruments in its toolkit to gain, sustain, and expand its presence. ECHOES OF A SOVIET APPROACH Moscow’s approach to Latin America today echoes Soviet outreach in the 1960s through 1980s. The Soviets had largely accepted U.S. dominance there, viewing it as too far away to defend militarily and too expensive to prop up economically. But when and where domestic politics were in flux, Moscow did not hesitate to insert itself, much as it is doing today. Moscow looked to develop ties with leftist parties and revolutionary movements that were sympathetic to communist and socialist leanings. These efforts kicked off in 1959, when Fidel Castro’s revolution in Cuba opened up new opportunities for the Soviet Union to project its influence in the Western Hemisphere. During this time period, Moscow sought to capitalize on regional rivalries, anti-U.S. sentiments, and the ambitions of local dictators to help it establish a presence and exploit polarizations within and between countries. In the wake of the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, Moscow provided Havana with financial and security benefits—about $4 billion in annual subsidies through the 1980s. In exchange, Cuba became an outpost for Soviet intelligence gathering and a platform to support other revolutionary movements in Latin America. Even as Soviet resources dwindled, the 1989 Soviet-Cuba treaty provided for the continuation of a special relationship that included financial support and arms supplies. In the 1980s, Moscow sent weapons to the leftist Sandinista government in Nicaragua as it fought to suppress the U.S.-backed Contras. Moscow also supplied Nicaragua with oil, machinery, and food. The relationship suffered when the Sandinistas were voted out in 1990, and Soviet financial support withered. In Peru, following the 1968 leftist military coup, the Soviets provided aircraft, tanks, and other equipment that contributed to Peru’s tense relations with Ecuador and Chile. The country returned to democracy after the 1975 countercoup. Peru’s ties to Moscow were subsequently reduced. In Argentina in the 1980s, the Soviet Union supported right-wing military groups and purchased beef and grain. This trade relationship, which also included sales to Argentina of heavy water and uranium, helped Moscow offset the partial trade embargo imposed on it by the United States in the wake of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. These economic and military ties evolved into political support when the Soviets sided with Argentina against the UK in the Falklands War and blocked UN discussions of Argentina’s human rights violations. Latin America’s progress toward democratic governance in the 1980s and 1990s limited Soviet and Russian influence there, as did the implosion of the Russian economy after the Soviet collapse. Yet the ties established during this period provide Moscow with a base of experience and networks it can draw upon today, particularly when negotiating commercial deals or arms sales. REGAINING TRACTION Russia began a gradual return to Latin America in the mid-2000s, led by loans and arms sales to Venezuela in 2005. Although Moscow no longer leverages socialist ideology to gain closer relations with Latin American nations, it seeks to exploit a shared desire for diversity in political, economic, and security relationships. On a political level, Moscow has used its connections in the region to message to the United States and the rest of the world that it is willing to stand up to Washington. This was apparent in the latter half of 2008 in the wake of the Russian-Georgian war meant to end Georgia’s push for NATO membership and U.S. support for it. As NATO and U.S. ships sailed to the Black Sea after the war, two Russian nuclear-capable bombers landed at an airfield in Venezuela and flew training missions for several days before returning to Russia. Later, a Russian naval flotilla, including the heavy nuclear-powered cruiser Peter the Great, conducted military exercises with Venezuela and visited ports in Cuba and Nicaragua. Russia’s then president Dmitry Medvedev visited Latin America in November 2008 and, over the course of the following year, hosted Venezuela’s then president Hugo Chávez, Nicaragua’s Daniel Ortega, Bolivia’s Evo Morales, and Ecuador’s then president Rafael Correa. It was a clear signal to Washington that Moscow could reciprocate and deploy forces in the United States’ backyard. A few years later, Moscow sought to demonstrate its global reach despite U.S. and European efforts to isolate it for its actions against Ukraine. Again it turned to Latin America. In July 2014, Putin visited Cuba, Argentina, Brazil, and Nicaragua, concluding a number of security and economic agreements. A Russian intelligence ship docked in Cuba later that year. In 2015, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu traveled to Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela where he met with leaders to discuss potential Russian access to ports and airfields. In Russia’s most recent Foreign Policy Concept—a public document issued in November 2016 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to lay out its priorities—Latin America did not figure prominently, but its increasing importance was recognized: “Russia remains committed to the comprehensive strengthening of relations with the Latin American and Caribbean States taking into account the growing role of this region in global affairs.” Moscow has been particularly drawn to developing relationships with countries that are part of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA), which was founded by Cuba and Venezuela and includes Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua, among others. This loose grouping has looked to create economic alternatives to Western-dominated financial institutions, holds largely anti-U.S. views, and is led by populists seeking to retain power, making it a like-minded partner for Moscow. In recent years, Moscow has relied primarily on arms sales and commercial deals—particularly in the energy sector—as its main points of entry to the region. Other activities have also included leveraging its newly established Spanish-language media outlets, as well as strengthening cultural and political ties, including through high-level visits. ARMS SALES AND SECURITY RELATIONSHIPS Moscow’s efforts to build ties to Latin America enjoy one important advantage: many of these countries are familiar with Soviet weapons and equipment, having purchased them in years past, and are attracted by the lower price tag of Russian arms. Through arms sales, Moscow looks to generate income, displace U.S. suppliers, and sustain and improve state-to-state security relationships. Cuba, Nicaragua, Peru, and Venezuela have been the leading purchasers of Russian arms in the region. For example, Russia has supplied 90 percent of Nicaraguan arms imports since 2000. The volume of arms sales can vary significantly from year to year, often depending on one major deal. Nevertheless, Russia has demonstrated that it is a serious competitor to the United States (see figure 2). Between 2000 and 2017, the share of arms sales to Latin America from Russia was about 20 percent, on par with the share of U.S. sales, according to data from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. While recent deals with Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela have stalled for various reasons, Russia is pursuing new opportunities this year with Bolivia, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Peru. COMMERCE, TRADE, AND ENERGY DEALS Moscow has looked to take advantage of opportunities where countries have been disadvantaged, rejected, or declined by state or private international financial institutions, presenting itself as an alternative and reliable partner. Moreover, Moscow often offers more attractive, flexible terms than lenders who adhere to Western business standards. From Russia’s perspective, developing commercial and trade relationships outside of the EU and the United States is an economic necessity in the face of current—and possibly future—economic sanctions. Moscow pursues state-to-state deals and uses state-owned or -controlled companies to secure footholds across the region. Russia’s strongest trade relationships, while small in absolute terms, are with Brazil and Mexico—together they make up about half of all of Russian trade in Latin America. Far more politically significant is the expansive relationship with Venezuela that has developed over the course of Putin’s time in office, with particular focus on the role of Russian energy giant Rosneft in the country’s energy sector. NEWS AND SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS Around the world, the growing access to the internet and social media, primarily via smart phones, has created a host of new tools to shape and manipulate public opinion. Latin American populations are particularly vulnerable, with an internet penetration rate of 65 percent or higher in most countries, and a sharp increase in access to mobile devices in poor, uneducated communities. In addition, governments are struggling to establish regulations that enable the discovery and blocking of false information and automated or fake personas. In this context, Moscow has worked steadily to expand its state-controlled propaganda platforms in nearly every Latin American and Caribbean country. Moscow-based RT is available across Latin America via cable providers and through agreements with local channels that rebroadcast its programs. RT Spanish was launched in 2009 and features its own news presenters and programming, as well as translated versions of RT English programming. Although based in Moscow, RT Spanish has bureaus in Buenos Aires, Caracas, Havana, Los Angeles, Madrid, Managua, and Miami. Russia’s Sputnik media outlet launched a Spanish operation in late 2014, providing radio- and web-based news and entertainment to audiences across Latin America. Populations in Latin America are particularly avid social media users compared to other regions in the world, according to data collected in 2015, making them susceptible to potential Russian efforts to promote divisive or anti-U.S. narratives via online platforms. Recent reporting suggests Cambridge Analytica, the firm that used data from Facebook to target U.S. voters in the 2016 presidential election, has been active in Mexico, Brazil, and possibly Colombia, raising the specter of Russian or other external attempts to manipulate public opinion during an election year. Tipping just one or two countries toward an anti-U.S. stance—especially long-time U.S. partners—could complicate U.S. policy and distract Washington from its global priorities. POLITICAL AND CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT Moscow has pursued a political and cultural agenda in Latin America as well. High-level leadership meetings have served as opportunities to demonstrate Moscow’s engagement and to secure agreements for further cooperation (see text box). Moscow has tapped into Russian cultural and historical traditions, as well as its small diaspora communities, to foster a friendly environment for its agenda in Latin America and by extension in multilateral organizations, such as the UN. According to Rossotrudnichestvo, the government agency in charge of Russia’s public diplomacy, Latin America has few Russian speakers—only about 200,000—but cultural and historical events attract growing numbers of local populations. The agency has also created a New Generation program geared toward young Latin American leaders in different fields who are between twenty and forty years old. The program brings participants to Russia for one week and offers lectures in Spanish on Russian internal politics, the country’s economy, and its approach to diplomacy. According to one participant, “They want us to see Russia with our own eyes, and not through what we’ve been told by others.”
Ever since Colombia signed its fragile, contested peace agreement with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in November 2016, the big question has been: What will this no-longer-armed insurgency do next? On Aug. 28, the FARC made its official reply. In its first congress since disarmament, the Marxist guerrilla group unveiled Colombia’s newest political party: the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común, or Commoners’ Alternative Revolutionary Force. “The new party will be built with many voices and diverse ideas,” announced Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri, the FARC’s top commander, via Twitter. In keeping their well-known acronym but setting aside the violence, the FARC seems to be embracing the opportunities and obligations of the 2016 accords. These enabled former combatants to participate in Colombia’s political system after disarmament – including, controversially, allocating the group 10 congressional seats for a period of two four-year terms. As the campaign season for the 2018 presidential and congressional elections heats up, everyone is now wondering whether this insurgency turned political party can find its place on Colombia’s political stage. New horizons For five decades, the FARC used violence to push its Marxist agenda of land reform and anti-capitalist revolution, forestalling political solutions to social problems and silencing the voice of millions of Colombians. In doing so, it also launched a roiling armed conflict that turned eight million people into victims of homicide, terrorism, grievous injury and displacement. The FARC maintains that it resorted to armed struggle because the Colombian political elite ran the country like a caste system, ignoring the struggles of the rural and peasant classes, which for much of the 20th century accounted for 70 percent of Colombia’s population. The FARC is now hoping to position itself as the party for these marginalized voters. To succeed, it must develop new organizational capacities, including the ability to process internal dissent and debate while maintaining party unity – a tricky feat considering that several FARC units have already reneged on the peace agreements. It must also build a political platform that can reach a wider segment of the Colombian electorate. Today, three-quarters of all Colombians live in cities. Voters in Bogota or Cali do not necessarily share the needs of the rural sectors that shaped the FARC’s political agenda. The FARC’s leadership is clearly aware that low popularity is a weakness. Recently, FARC leadership invited the former soccer star Rene Higuita to run as a FARC congressional candidate, and they have made other clear bids to attract the general population. In the Icononzo transitional zone, FARC-EP members filmed this video that represents their permanent joy and happiness for achieving #peace There is certainly room for new voices in Colombia’s political debate. In the past, peace and security have topped Colombians’ list of concerns. But since the peace process, voters have turned their attention to other issues, including corruption and its role in the state’s inability to deliver services. The FARC’s rhetoric during its armed struggle often centered on health care, public education and economic development, so it is now closely associated with demands for better state services. As such, the group has the potential to promote a political agenda of inclusion and to advocate for more effective solutions to the problems that concern Colombians across the country. Room for debate Signs of change are already afoot. Earlier this year, when the citizens of Buenaventura took to the streets to protest low wages and lack of basic services, newspapers reported dispassionately on the marches, giving voice to protestors’ grievances. In the past, media commentators were generally quick to dub such marches as “FARC-inspired.” This effectively delegitimized peasants’ complaints of state neglect. This subtle shift illustrates the political opening created by the peace process: The FARC’s absence as a violent actor makes a proper democracy possible in Colombia. But the success of the new FARC will not depend entirely on its ability to attract public support. In this fractured nation, the group must also be seen as a force for reconciliation. And, paradoxically enough, this is made possible by the fact that many powerful, hawkish Colombian politicians tried to derail last year’s accords, which allowed the new FARC to position themselves as agents of peace. The Colombian establishment is unintentionally empowering the new FARC in other ways, too. For decades armed conflict and fear were used as a shield to cover up malfeasance by government officials and state institutions. Peace has made corruption far more visible, and it now sits squarely on the FARC’s agenda. The Green Party, Liberal Party and some conservative parties, too, are starting to join the anti-corruption crusade.
Although still dwarfed by weapons sales from the United States and elsewhere, Russia has made significant inroads in recent years throughout Latin America, primarily with friendly countries, to expand its arms sales in the region. A recent NATO report noted the significant military purchases of Russian equipment by the Maduro regime, as well as President Ortega in Nicaragua: Since 2005, Venezuela has purchased $11 billion worth of equipment from Russia, including fighter jets, helicopters and rifles. Moscow provided loans to Caracas to help purchase the S-300VM anti-ballistic missile system to protect Venezuelan waters in 2013. The recent acquisition made Venezuela the second biggest importer of Russian arms between 2012 and 2015, after India. Lately, Russia also sent warships to the Caribbean to perform drug patrols. Colombians were outraged in October 2013, when two Russian supersonic bombers, capable of carrying nuclear warheads, flew from Venezuela to Nicaragua over San Andres, disputed territory between Colombia and Nicaragua. In March 2015, Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro ordered the major military exercise “Bolivarian shield,” with Russian participation, as a response to U.S. sanctions against seven Venezuelan officials.12 The Russian news agency TASS recently reported that since 2000, the Russian arms exporter Rosoboronexport has sold $10 billion in weaponry and military equipment to Latin American nations.13 The company is working with Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru to broker deals for both ground and air equipment, in particular Ural trucks and motor vehicles. In addition to Rosoboronexport, the Russian companies Rostec and Irkut Aircraft Corporation are also known to be operating in the region, including attending military expositions in Latin America. Although producing few tangible results, Russia has also publicly expressed its willingness to partner on nuclear projects in Latin America. In October 2016, Russia and Paraguay announced a new Pacific nuclear energy partnership, which begins a new wave of investments and technology sharing between the two countries.14 Similarly, in January 2018 Argentina announced a recent memorandum of understanding with Russia’s state nuclear corporation Rosatom, which covered uranium exploration in Argentina as well as assistance in the construction of nuclear power plants.15 Russia has also made a concerted effort to deepen its partnerships with Bolivia, recently announcing that it would assist Bolivia in building a “nuclear center to research radiation technologies applied in agriculture, medicine and various industries.”16 After announcing that he had met with a number of Russian officials, and was considering additional partnerships in a number of other areas—including lithium production—Bolivian President Evo Morales, who recently visited Russia, commented warmly on the growing Russian presence in the region.17
All great powers seek to enforce their writ in their immediate neighborhood, and the avoidance of needless conflict requires a decent respect for that reality. Trump administration officials and their hawkish domestic allies sound increasingly strident alarm bells about foreign meddling in Venezuela’s internal political turmoil. They contend that Russia, China, Cuba, and Hezbollah are especially active in supporting leftist president Nicolas Maduro’s beleaguered government. Indeed, some U.S. analysts insist that without outside backing, especially by Russia and Cuba, pro-democracy opposition forces likely would have forced him to relinquish power already. When anti-government demonstrations erupted in Caracas on April 30, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo stated that Maduro had been ready to board a plane to fly to exile in Havana but changed his mind at Russia’s urging. U.S. leaders appear to exaggerate the extent of Moscow’s meddling. Given Maduro’s uncompromising behavior throughout the most recent demonstrations, the notion that he was ready to flee the country absent Russian intervention seems far-fetched. The loyalty of Venezuela’s military has not yet wavered, and he continues to draw support from left-wing citizens’ militias. Those factors have been more relevant to his continued grip on power than Russian (or any other foreign) support. Nevertheless, Russia definitely has meddled in Venezuela’s political turbulence. Moscow is a major financial prop for Maduro’s government, and the Kremlin has provided tangible military backing as well. In December 2018, Russia deployed two nuclear-capable bombers to Venezuela, and in March 2019, it sent some 200 military personnel to help Caracas refurbish its air defense system. Several hundred Russian mercenaries also appear to be operating in the country to assist Maduro’s security forces deal with regime opponents. Maduro’s foreign minister fanned the flames of Washington’s worry and anger by stating that Russia’s military involvement in his country might even increase. The United States has insisted on maintaining a sphere of influence in the Western Hemisphere since the proclamation of the Monroe Doctrine in the 1820s. Russia’s policy in Venezuela represents a direct challenge to that doctrine, and U.S. leaders should make it clear that a continuation of such behavior will have a markedly negative effect on bilateral relations. Cuba has been a foreign political and military client in the hemisphere for decades, precisely the situation the Monroe Doctrine aimed to prevent. The United States has no right or justification to dictate Venezuela’s internal governance, but it would be unwise to tolerate the establishment of a second hostile foreign client state. The Trump administration should insist that Russia respect the Monroe Doctrine and confine its Venezuelan ties to normal diplomatic and economic relations. At the same time, it is essential for U.S. officials to acknowledge that the United States and its NATO allies have shown contempt for Russia’s sphere of influence—and even its core security zone—in Eastern Europe. Washington’s roster of provocations is long and damaging. With strong U.S. encouragement, NATO’s membership has crept inexorably eastward, reaching the western border of the Russian Federation and even incorporating the three Baltic republics, which had been constituent parts of both Czarist Russia and the Soviet Union. Beginning with George W. Bush’s administration, Washington has pressed NATO to expand still farther and offer membership to both Georgia and Ukraine. The United States and its allies have greatly increased the number and scope of their military deployments and war games in Eastern Europe and the Black Sea. Barack Obama’s administration interfered blatantly in Ukraine’s internal political affairs to unseat a democratically elected, pro-Russian government and replace it with a pro-Western regime in 2014. Since then, Washington has made Ukraine a de facto military ally, training and conducting joint military exercises with Ukrainian forces and concluding two significant arms sales to Kiev. Moscow’s meddling in Venezuela likely is at least partially designed to be payback for Washington’s intrusive, provocative policies in Eastern Europe. The ingredients, therefore, exist for a sensible agreement embodying needed restraint on both sides. U.S. leaders should inform the Russian government that they are willing to end their quest to bring Ukraine and Georgia into NATO and to cease all military connections with Kiev and Tbilisi—including weapons sales and joint exercises. Washington also should offer to end its “rotational” deployment of troops, planes, and warships in Eastern Europe and the Black Sea. In other words, Washington would be willing to respect a Russian sphere of influence in that region. As a tradeoff, the Trump administration should insist that Moscow greatly dilute its involvement in Venezuela and Cuba; and the administration should suggest that it end a growing flirtation with Nicaragua’s leftist government. That retrenchment especially would require Russia to reverse its growing military presence anywhere in the Western Hemisphere. Such an offer requires greater realism on the part of U.S. policymakers and political leaders. Spheres of influence have always played a major role in international affairs, and despite assertions by prominent members of the American foreign policy community, they still do. All great powers seek to enforce their writ in their immediate neighborhood, and the avoidance of needless conflict requires a decent respect for that reality. Recent U.S. administrations have violated that important principle, and their behavior is producing retaliation and a spike in international tensions. The Trump administration can reverse that trend by insisting on Russia’s respect for the Monroe Doctrine while spurning the advice of hawks who think the United States can and should assert dominance in Ukraine and other portions of Eastern Europe. U.S. leaders would be wise to propose such a deal sooner rather later.
Russia is working to expand its presence in Latin America, largely at Washington’s expense, and 2018 presents it with many opportunities to do so. Five Latin American countries—Cuba, Venezuela, Colombia, Mexico, and Brazil—are going through political transitions this year with multiple openings for Russia to meddle. Souring attitudes toward the United States throughout the region over trade and immigration issues, the rise of populist candidates, and the deepening internal economic and social challenges facing many Latin American countries create favorable circumstances for Russia to advance its interests. Capitalizing on opportunities to gain a foothold in Latin America is a familiar strategy for Russia. As White House Chief of Staff John Kelly testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee in March 2015 in his capacity as head of the U.S. Southern Command, the arm of the U.S. military responsible for operations in Central and South America: Periodically since 2008, Russia has pursued an increased presence in Latin America through propaganda, military arms and equipment sales, counterdrug agreements, and trade. Under President [Vladimir] Putin, however, we have seen a clear return to Cold War-tactics. As part of its global strategy, Russia is using power projection in an attempt to erode U.S. leadership and challenge U.S. influence in the Western Hemisphere. Putin will want to be well positioned to spotlight his Latin American ties for the upcoming G20 summit, scheduled for November 30–December 1 in Buenos Aires, Argentina—the first of these to be hosted in South America. For Moscow, this event will be one way to push back against the outcry and diplomatic isolation from Western governments after the March 2018 poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal in the United Kingdom and the April 2018 chemical weapons attack in Syria. Putin is likely to tout his relationships with Latin American leaders—such as the strategic partnership agreement he signed earlier this year with Argentinian President Mauricio Macri—to avoid a repeat of the chilly reception that he received at the 2014 G20 summit in Australia after Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea. RUSSIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER PUTIN For much of the post–Cold War era, the United States and Europe paid little attention to Russia’s efforts to expand its political, economic, and military influence abroad. The Soviet Union’s dissolution, Russia’s internal challenges, and Moscow’s stated desire for integration with the West sharply constrained the Kremlin’s interest and capacity to project its influence on a global scale and diminished the West’s interest in Russia’s foreign policy and global activities. The West saw these efforts as primarily confined to Russia’s immediate neighborhood and largely ineffective elsewhere. However, since Vladimir Putin’s return to the presidency in 2012, Russia has engaged in a broad and surprisingly effective campaign to expand its global reach. His reelection in March 2018 is likely to see this campaign continue. To advance Russian objectives, Moscow has relied on a wide array of diplomatic, military, intelligence, cyber, trade, energy, and financial tools to influence political systems, public attitudes, and elite decisionmakers in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Asia, and Latin America. These objectives—as outlined in the 2017 Carnegie paper “The Return of Global Russia: An Analytical Framework”—include, primarily, undermining the U.S.-led liberal international order and the West’s cohesion; enhancing Putin’s domestic legitimacy by demonstrating Russia’s status as a global power; and promoting specific Russian commercial, military, and energy interests.1 Russian activity in Latin America has not received nearly the same attention as Russian meddling in the former Soviet space, Europe, or the United States, where its impact is far more visible and wide-ranging. Yet Moscow may view its gains in Central and South America as payback for what it has viewed as U.S. interference in Russia’s backyard. How effectively can Moscow expand its fairly limited standing in the region beyond long-standing ties with Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela? Can it significantly complicate U.S. relationships with partners such as Mexico, Colombia, Brazil, and Argentina? Will it be able to degrade the United States’ image and reputation in the region? For the United States, Russia’s increasing presence in the Western Hemisphere is an unwelcome factor that can further roil relations with its southern neighbors and could present new military and security threats. Russia is active in Latin America primarily through arms sales, commercial agreements, and high-level political outreach. While these activities are driven largely by financial incentives, Putin’s motivation to boost Russia’s profile is also firmly rooted in geopolitics. Moscow has looked to develop partnerships with countries that share an interest in creating institutions and relationships that are not dominated by the United States or Europe. It has cultivated a relationship with Brazil through the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) group, for example. Moscow has also sought to deepen ties with allies that share the Kremlin’s increasingly authoritarian approach to governance and resentment of U.S. global leadership, such as Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega, Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro, and Bolivian President Evo Morales. More recently, Moscow’s efforts have sought to take advantage of U.S. policy shifts that have created tensions in some countries’ relations with the United States. U.S. President Donald Trump’s administration has sharply criticized Mexico’s stance on NAFTA and has called for a crackdown on immigration from Latin America. The administration threatened the Maduro government with military force in 2017 and has imposed increasingly severe financial sanctions to encourage a political deal between the Venezuelan regime and its opponents. Moscow appears poised to capitalize on these tensions in 2018 and to manipulate the environment to its advantage.
Russia is looking to develop a presence in all corners of the globe to solidify its image as a world power. It also seeks to build relationships and create institutions that further its aim of creating a multipolar world. Moscow has almost certainly taken note of the many Central and South American nations that have sought to assert their foreign policy independence and have not consistently aligned themselves with the United States. For example, the Rio Group denounced the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia.2 In 2003, Chile and Mexico indicated they would vote against the draft UN resolution for military action in Iraq. In 2014, Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela voted against the resolution condemning Russia’s action in Crimea. This year, less than half of member heads of state attended the Summit of the Americas in Lima, Peru. Such a decline in enthusiasm for an event that has long been an opportunity for the United States to showcase its leadership among American nations probably provides further incentive for Moscow to continue building bridges with the region. TRADE AND INVESTMENT Starting from a very low base, Russia stands to gain economically by expanding its trade and investment relationships in the region, particularly in the face of U.S. and European sanctions. Although total trade between Russia and the Latin American and Caribbean region was only $12 billion in 2016, it has increased by 44 percent since 2006, with Brazil and Mexico representing about 50 percent of all Russian trade with the region. During this period, Russian firms have made significant investments in the oil and gas sector in countries such as Bolivia, Mexico, and Venezuela. The broader economic relationship with Latin America remains subdued due to Russia’s overall economic decline. MILITARY POWER PROJECTION Moscow probably calculates that close relations—whether built around arms sales, trade or energy deals, or similar political views—will translate into physical access for Russian military and security activities. Access to ports and airfields enables Moscow to deploy military assets to the region, projecting its power and messaging the United States. After the Georgian war in August 2008, for example, Russia sent ships on port visits to the Caribbean and Venezuela and flew bombers on long-range patrols. Although Moscow claimed these exercises had been long planned, they were well timed to message its displeasure with Washington’s support for the Georgian government, which had included sending U.S. ships to the Black Sea. Amid worsening tensions with the United States, Russia has opened facilities in Nicaragua ostensibly for counternarcotics-related activities, and Russian officials have spoken periodically about potentially reopening an intelligence collection facility in Lourdes, Cuba, that was shuttered in 2001. Such efforts, at a minimum, serve as a reminder that Moscow could expand its military and security footprint in the Western Hemisphere to counter or pressure the United States militarily.
Moscow’s efforts to build ties to Latin America enjoy one important advantage: many of these countries are familiar with Soviet weapons and equipment, having purchased them in years past, and are attracted by the lower price tag of Russian arms. Through arms sales, Moscow looks to generate income, displace U.S. suppliers, and sustain and improve state-to-state security relationships. Cuba, Nicaragua, Peru, and Venezuela have been the leading purchasers of Russian arms in the region. For example, Russia has supplied 90 percent of Nicaraguan arms imports since 2000. The volume of arms sales can vary significantly from year to year, often depending on one major deal. Nevertheless, Russia has demonstrated that it is a serious competitor to the United States (see figure 2). Between 2000 and 2017, the share of arms sales to Latin America from Russia was about 20 percent, on par with the share of U.S. sales, according to data from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. While recent deals with Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela have stalled for various reasons, Russia is pursuing new opportunities this year with Bolivia, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Peru. Moscow has looked to take advantage of opportunities where countries have been disadvantaged, rejected, or declined by state or private international financial institutions, presenting itself as an alternative and reliable partner. Moreover, Moscow often offers more attractive, flexible terms than lenders who adhere to Western business standards.
Around the world, the growing access to the internet and social media, primarily via smart phones, has created a host of new tools to shape and manipulate public opinion. Latin American populations are particularly vulnerable, with an internet penetration rate of 65 percent or higher in most countries, and a sharp increase in access to mobile devices in poor, uneducated communities. In addition, governments are struggling to establish regulations that enable the discovery and blocking of false information and automated or fake personas. In this context, Moscow has worked steadily to expand its state-controlled propaganda platforms in nearly every Latin American and Caribbean country. Moscow-based RT is available across Latin America via cable providers and through agreements with local channels that rebroadcast its programs. RT Spanish was launched in 2009 and features its own news presenters and programming, as well as translated versions of RT English programming. Although based in Moscow, RT Spanish has bureaus in Buenos Aires, Caracas, Havana, Los Angeles, Madrid, Managua, and Miami. Russia’s Sputnik media outlet launched a Spanish operation in late 2014, providing radio- and web-based news and entertainment to audiences across Latin America. Populations in Latin America are particularly avid social media users compared to other regions in the world, according to data collected in 2015, making them susceptible to potential Russian efforts to promote divisive or anti-U.S. narratives via online platforms. Recent reporting suggests Cambridge Analytica, the firm that used data from Facebook to target U.S. voters in the 2016 presidential election, has been active in Mexico, Brazil, and possibly Colombia, raising the specter of Russian or other external attempts to manipulate public opinion during an election year. Tipping just one or two countries toward an anti-U.S. stance—especially long-time U.S. partners—could complicate U.S. policy and distract Washington from its global priorities.
Although Russia’s efforts to engage Latin America are largely overshadowed by the U.S. and Chinese presence, Moscow’s propaganda outlets are working to stoke anti-U.S. sentiment and support populist figures in upcoming elections. Moscow is also using its military and commercial ties to establish a meaningful presence, and thus enhance its image as a global power. As Russia-U.S. relations continue to deteriorate, Russia will likely turn to the Western Hemisphere as an important symbol of its global reach and to challenge the United States. Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela are poised to serve as the cornerstones of this effort but do not on their own provide enough critical mass to allow Moscow to shape the region’s overall direction. Moscow’s reach in Latin America is limited by its modest resources. Russian military deployments there are costly and complicated, and Moscow lacks the financial resources to meet Latin America’s need for foreign investment or to serve as an important market for exports. Yet Moscow has been adept at promoting its presence at a low cost, and it can sustain this approach for a long time. When combined with China’s growing role in Latin America, this puts U.S. leadership and dominance at risk. Over time, Washington faces the prospect of losing ground with important economic and political allies. In the political realm, Russia is looking to draw on its ties with countries in the region to promote its international agenda. Over the past ten years, it has received political support from a handful of countries—Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela—across a host of issues important to Russia, such as Georgia, Syria, and Ukraine. Bolivia’s Morales tweeted upon Putin’s reelection that it “guarantees geopolitical equilibrium and world peace before the onslaught of imperialism.” In the economic realm, Russia is ready to capitalize on the fallout from NAFTA renegotiations, and while it cannot economically replace the United States as a consumer or an investor, it is well positioned to respond to Latin American nations’ eagerness to diversify away from what they see as an unreliable, uncooperative United States. In terms of security, the United States faces potential military and intelligence challenges if Moscow is able to establish a greater physical presence in the region. Short of establishing its own bases, Moscow could pursue agreements with key countries that would provide it with the option of placing its assets and forces in the United States’ backyard. Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela have hosted Russian ships in their ports and have engaged in joint exercises.
With measured nuance, Russia is discovering a new “El Dorado” in Latin America. Since around 2008, the Kremlin has accelerated its presence in a broad and diversified manner in the Western Hemisphere, taking advantage of shifted U.S. attention and an absent European Union. With relevant historical antecedents, despite a brief interregnum following the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, the reality of Latin America’s political landscape, which is still defined by leftist and nationalist-populist governments, has renewed Russian interest in Latin America. For Russia, Latin America is especially compelling from a geostrategic perspective because of its geographic proximity to the United States. In addition, the region draws Moscow’s attention because of the reality of the country’s foreign diplomacy, which has suffered considerably from U.S. and EU sanctions in response to the crises in Georgia and Crimea. The support given to Moscow by several Latin American countries (Venezuela, Nicaragua, Cuba, Bolivia and Ecuador) in the face of Western sanctions, as well as the abstention of Brazil, together with the fact that these countries have refused to join Washington’s criticism of ongoing Russian military intervention in Syria, has further encouraged Vladimir Putin to focus his attention on the region with the goal of reducing his international isolation. In the post-Crimean context, Latin America has provided Russia with important markets for trade, particularly in the face of Western sanctions. Earlier, the brief Russian-Georgian war (2008) persuaded the Kremlin of the need to expand the scope of its new national security strategy to the Western Hemisphere. The conflict with Georgia led to the de facto independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which were immediately recognized not only by Russia but also by Latin American allies including Venezuela and Nicaragua. After various attempts from Western democracies to move ex-Soviet countries away from the Russian sphere of influence (particularly in Ukraine and Georgia), Moscow has begun to forge strategic military alliances (including nuclear) in Washington’s backyard, particularly with Venezuela, Cuba and Nicaragua, and to a lesser extent with Brazil, Peru, Argentina and Bolivia. In recent years, prominent think tanks in Washington have begun to warn of an alleged “Russian threat” to U.S. national security interests. These warnings should be taken seriously, but with informed moderation.
Russian engagement in Latin America is limited in both the resources it has available to dedicate, as well as the range of countries and sectors in which it principally focuses. Its engagement is generally episodic and often reactive to US activities in what it considers its own “near abroad,” including US attempts to expand the boundaries of NATO, deploy missile defense systems in Russia’s periphery, US deployments during the 2009 Georgian Civil War, and US pressures on Russia during the Ukraine crisis of 2013-14. Nonetheless, as a nuclear power with significant conventional capabilities, which has demonstrated its willingness to act belligerently against the US in the hemisphere through the deployment of nuclear capable Tu-160 bombers and warships on multiple occasions (among other behaviors), Russia’s position and activities in Latin America must be considered a potential strategic threat to the US In contrast to the PRC, Russia arguably has a greater reserve of understanding of the politics of the region, largely from the (now aging) cold-war era intelligence specialists and academics who in the previous era worked with the Cubans and other promoters of communist insurgency in the region. While Russia has far fewer resources to act in or impact the region, compared to the People’s Republic of China (PRC), and while Russia and China occasionally compete with respect to commercial projects and arms sales in the region, there is an inherent synergy between PRC and Russian activities in Latin America, which must be considered when assessing the risks posed by Russia’s activities. Specifically, PRC loans, investments, commodity purchases, and diplomacy help sustain populist regimes in the region such as Venezuela, contribute to the viability of those regimes. Subsequently engaging with Russia tends to be in a manner more hostile than with China, who is more actively seeking to avoid conflict with the US. Russia’s fledging efforts to coordinate with China in Latin America on select issues, such as the crisis in Venezuela, magnifies the strategic threat that its activities present to US interests. Russian Interests and Objectives in Latin America Russia’s strategic interests in Latin America do not directly originate in its current security, prosperity, or regime survival, so much as they are a product of the current regime’s desire to show domestic audiences that it is returning Russia to a “greatness” rooted in a romanticized concept of Russia’s 19th and 20th Century past. Russia also has an interest in exploiting Latin America’s proximity and economic and human connectedness to the United States, in order to act there in ways that threaten the US as a vehicle for buying Russia greater autonomy of action in the geographic area close to its own territory. Russia’s current government under Vladimir Putin (and to an extent, that of his predecessor Dimitry Medvedev) has worked with a coalition of anti-US regimes, including those in Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba, to maintain a political and military position that demonstrates Russia’s global reach, sending a warning to the US that Russia could threaten the US in its “backyard” if the US continues to pressure Russia and interfere in Russia’s “near abroad.” Separately, through helping to prop up rogue regimes such as those of Venezuela and Nicaragua, and manipulate the politics of others, such as Ellis 77 Mexico, Russia seeks to undermine the consolidation of the region as a group of pro-US states adhering to “Washington Consensus” policies of free trade, democracy, and the rule of law, and in the process, distract the US and weaken its strategic position in the Western hemisphere. Beyond such strategic goals, Russia also has some commercial interests in Latin America and the Caribbean. While these interests are to some degree related to national priorities through the profits of Russian businesses and Russia’s ability to feed itself, they are more principally interests of Russian companies and the individual oligarchs that control them (including Igor Sechin, head of the oil company Rosneft, or Oleg Deripaska, the billionaire head of mining conglomerate Rusal) (Ellis, 2015). While Russia purchases significant amounts of meat and other agricultural products from the region (principally from South America), and while Russia opportunistically leverages such purchases to strengthen relationships with the individual countries in which it conducts such transactions, Russia does not behave in a way that suggests that it considers such food supplies and other products from the region critical to its national interests, or a key vehicle in a broader plan for securing other national objectives (such a strengthening its strategic position in specific parts of Latin America). (Ellis, 2015). Recent Russian Activities in Latin America Russian activities in Latin America may be divided into (1) political-military initiatives with key partners but which also have an economic component, (2) more purely economic activities in search of expanded political leverage, and (3) non-economic influence operations, principally seeking to support Russia’s friends, and sew doubts or undermine support for the US, regional stability, or promarket democratic values in other nations of the region. Overall, Russia’s position in Latin America and the Caribbean in the past five years has weakened considerably, due largely to a political shift to the right across the region. That shift has been deepened and sustained, ironically, through the negative political and economic example of the populist-socialist Maduro regime in Venezuela (which Russia helped to sustain in power). Outside of Venezuela, such changes include the replacement the pro-Russian Peronist regime of Christina Fernandez de Kirchner by the pro-market government of Mauricio Macri in Argentina’s October 2015 elections. The expulsion of Christina and her leftist-Peronist government substantively froze Argentina’s courtship of Russia, which had included consideration of the purchase of Russian Su-24 fighter aircraft, oil deals, nuclear power collaboration, and the construction of a hydroelectric facility by the Russian firm InterRao. In Peru, the April 2016 victory of neoliberal Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (replaced by equally conservative Martin Vizcarra in Peru when Kuczynski resigned in March 2018), similarly slowed Russian advances and set the stage for an investigation of corruption associated with the purchase of Russian helicopters by the preceding administration of Ollanta Humala. In Chile, in December 2017, elections removed the center-left Concertación coalition from the presidency, returning to power center-right businessman Sebastian Pinera. In the process, it ended Chile’s cautious exploration of military ties with Russia, begun by outgoing President Michelle Bachelet, who had been drawn to the left, in part, through the communists in her coalition. Similarly victories in Colombia by conservative Ivan Duque in that nation’s March 2018 election, in Paraguay, by Mario Abdo Benitez in April 2018, and in Brazil, by Jair Bolsonaro in October 2018, foreclosed ties cautiously being developed with Russia by governments in those countries (including the contemplated purchase of a Russian air defense system by Brazil) (Ellis, 2017). Ellis 78 Russia’s most significant activities in Latin America in recent years arguably center on the nation’s three principal enduring strategic partners: Venezuela, Nicaragua, and Cuba, although Russia has also suffered significant setbacks in each of these relationships during the period. Venezuela, under the socialist governments of Hugo Chavez and Nicholas Maduro, has been the partner that has most permitted Russia to use its territory and resources to advance Russian strategic objectives. From 2006 until Venezuelan resources began to run out, coinciding with Chavez’ death (officially in March 2013), Venezuela bought over $11 billion in arms from Russia, including Su-30 fighter aircraft, Mi-35 attack helicopters, Mi-17 transport helicopters, T-72 tanks, BMP and BTR armored vehicles, and a range of other equipment (Ellis, 2015). On three separate occasions, Venezuela allowed (perhaps encouraged) Russia to operate nuclear-capable Tu-160 bombers out of its country (in 2008, 2013, and 2018), and in 2008, Russia deployed warships to Venezuela. In 2008 and 2013, Venezuela allowed Russia to establish a military airbase on La Orchila island, just off the Venezuelan coast and in close proximity to the United States. The Russian oil company Rosneft has loaned an estimated $6 billion to the Venezuelan national oil company PdVSA and has invested billions more in the country. It has helped to shelter Venezuela from the effect of US sanctions by making its Vadinar refinery in India available to refine Venezuelan oil, as an alternative to using US Gulf coast refineries. Russia also sent mercenaries to Venezuela in December 2018 and allowed the Venezuelan oil company PdVSA to relocate its offices from Lisbon to Moscow. Russia also joined China in February 2019 in blocking a United Nations resolution that might have facilitated a UN peace enforcement force to help the legitimate government of Juan Guaido consolidate his physical control over Venezuela (Schwirtz, 2019). Russia’s help to Venezuela has not always produced the hoped-for results. Its arms sales to Venezuela were significantly curtailed when Venezuela ran out of money. Four of Russia’s five oil companies pulled out of Venezuela due to bad experiences there (Lukoil, TNK, Gazprom, and Surgutneftegaz). PdVSA, the Venezuelan state-owned energy company, has fallen behind in its payments to Russian energy producer Rosneft. Making matters worse, Rosneft is likely to be prevented from taking control of the downstream oil company CITGO, offered by PdVSA as collateral for a $1.5 billion loan. With the deepening crisis in Venezuela, Nicaragua has expanded in value as a partner for Russia in the region. Building on Nicaragua’s previous relationship as a client state of the Soviet Union from 1979-1990, when former communist president Daniel Ortega and his Sandinista party returned to power in 2007, Nicaragua endeared itself to Moscow by recognizing the pro-Russian separatists in South Ossetia and Abkhazia during the 2008 Georgian civil war. In the decade which followed, Russia provided Nicaragua food supplies, busses and other donated goods, as well as T-72 tanks, armored vehicles, patrol boats, and missile boats to upgrade its military, a police training center in Managua, and an antenna-laden GLONASS satellite downlink facility (suspiciously close to the US embassy in Managua). Nicaragua also signed an agreement facilitating access by Russian warships to its ports, as well as allowing Russian Tu-160 bombers to land in the country (in the process violating Colombian airspace) while visiting the region in 2013. While Cuba’s relations with Russia were strained due to the latter’s abrupt withdrawal of financial support following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia bought some goodwill by forgiving $30 billion of the island’s outstanding $35 billion in cold-war era debt. Russian companies have been involved in Cuba’s nickel and petroleum industries, and committed to construction projects involving thermoelectric plants, an airport and the Mariel port. Russian firms also sold or donated cars and other vehicles to Cuba, and explored renovating the Cienfuegos refinery (and possibly even completing Cuba’s cold war-era Juragua nuclear power plant). Nonetheless, despite proclamations of interest from Russian legislators, Cuba has not led Russia resume use of its Cold-War signals Ellis 79 intelligence facilities in Lourdes, Bejucal, or Santiago de Cuba (for monitoring the US), nor has it bought significant quantities of Russian military equipment or participated in all of the occasions since 2008 in which Russia has deployed military assets to the region. Cuba has, however, permitted some visits by Russian warships (including the docking of the signals collection ship Leonov in Havana Harbor in February 2014 when the US was negotiating with Cuba to restore diplomatic relations). Beyond these key partners, with respect to military engagement, Russia has leveraged previous sales to Peru (beginning under the regime of General Juan Velasco Alvarado and continuing with Mig-29 sales during the administration of Alberto Fujimori), to sell the country Mi-17s, Mi-35s, and other equipment and support packages, although in at least one case (regarding replacement of Peru’s aging BM-21 self-propelled rocket launchers), Russia lost out to a Chinese competitor selling its Type 90B system. Russia has also signed a military cooperation agreement with Suriname. With respect to extractive sectors, Russian oil companies are doing work in Ecuador Bolivia, Venezuela, and Cuba, among other countries, while Rusal, as noted previously, has a presence in Jamaica, Guyana and Cuba. Nonetheless, all of these ventures are generally hampered by low international commodity prices and a lack of funds to expand through acquisitions as aggressively as their Chinese counterparts (Ellis, 2014; Ellis, 2018). With respect to sales of Russian products and services, beyond arms (where Russian helicopters and other equipment are relatively common in the region), Russian construction company InterRao and the equipment manufacturer Power Machines, as well as Lada cars and Kamaz trucks, only have a limited presence. For the US, the lighter Russian presence is, in part positive, since the lack of sales means that Russian products are not seen as competition by local manufacturers, in the way that Chinese products often are (Ellis, 2016). With respect to Russian imports from Latin America, while Russia purchases a sizable quantity of meat and grains, principally from the southern cone, the size of the Russian market does not generally inspire the imagination of Latin American politicians and businessmen the way the 1.4 billion-person Chinese market does. Likely Future Russian Activities in Latin America For the moment, Russia appears likely to continue its principally reactive set of political and military activities in Latin America, and limited economic engagement. The most likely sources of near-term change may come from the evolving situations in Venezuela, Cuba, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Guatemala, as well as through expanded cooperation with the PRC in the region.
Amid its obsession with reconfiguring world order, Russia seeks to increase its bonds with other Asian and Latin American countries through weapons, economic, and political connections. In addition to Venezuela—Russia’s main partner—Nicaragua and Bolivia help the Kremlin increase its influence in the region. There is also renewed interest in reviving relations with Cuba. “Russia doesn’t bet on a regime, but on a position,” Armado Rodríguez Luna, research fellow at the Collective for Security Analysis with Democracy, based in Mexico, told Diálogo. “Due to its proximity to the United States, Latin America represents a geostrategic scenario for Russia.” The Russian government will favor countries that can bring economic and security benefits to Moscow and those offering leverage to help the Kremlin become a tactical player in the world. Russia is on a global quest for opportunities. “Since Vladimir Putin took office as the Russian president, he seeks to show that Russian power is as strong as it was in the days of the Soviet Union,” Jorge Serrano Torres, professor and advisor of Strategic Intelligence at the Center for Higher National Studies in Peru, told Diálogo. “He insists on strengthening partnerships and establishing new bonds with some Latin American countries to satisfy their strategic, economic, and even nuclear needs.” Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega, his Bolivian counterpart Evo Morales, the Castro regime in Cuba, and Putin not only share the same political view of the world, but also cling to power. “Bolivia and Nicaragua help Russia extend its influence in the region, so as to remain in power in the face of their Venezuelan partner’s downfall,” Serrano said. In light of the Venezuelan and Nicaraguan crises, Putin is trying to revive ties with Cuba. Nicaragua and the domino effect Nicaragua and Russia revived their bond in 2007, when the Sandinista National Liberation Front made a comeback and Ortega became president again. More than a decade ago, Russia started sending military tanks to Nicaragua, where it installed the Global Satellite Navigation System, or GLONASS, in 2017. Russia also sent patrol boats, missile warships, fighter and training aircraft, and air defense systems to modernize the Nicaraguan Armed Forces and strengthen their response capabilities. Russian cooperation includes the construction of the Central American Counternarcotics Military Training Center. According to a March 2019 report from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), weapons imports in Central America and the Caribbean increased 49 percent between 2014 and 2018, compared to the previous five years. The report indicates that Russia is one of the main exporters of weapons and military equipment. “Nicaragua is an important bridge for Russian strategic positioning, when it comes to having military leverage in the region,” Rodríguez said. “It’s also a linking platform for Moscow to access information on transnational organized criminal networks in Latin America, especially Central America, to create a base for intelligence operations.” Rodríguez and Serrano agree that Russia’s actions in the Central American country are not intended to get Nicaragua “armed to the teeth,” but to show Russia’s repositioning capabilities and “power game.” They also think that Russia’s military connection helps exhibit some Nicaraguan military power, because the country doesn’t have a defense policy as such. “Putin is aware that the Latin American reality changed, and he knows that he won’t be able to set up military bases in Latin America. However, he is bent on increasing his influence in the region,” Serrano said. “Nicaragua will fall like a domino after Maduro’s dictatorship comes to an end.”​​​​​​​ The Bolivian case Morales was the first Bolivian president to visit Moscow and bet on Russia. In July 2019, Morales will visit the Kremlin to review the bilateral agenda and sign new strategic agreements with the Russian president. The two countries have signed technical military agreements as well as trade and energy agreements. Since Morales took office in 2006, he pushes to modernize the Armed Forces by updating military equipment to improve defense capabilities. In November 2018, Bolivia announced it would obtain training helicopters for its Air Force. “For years, the Kremlin sought to spell out trading projects concerning military weapons with Bolivia,” Serrano said. “In their next meeting, Putin and Morales will discuss this issue, as well as Maduro’s imminent demise, as Bolivia will be isolated in the region, lacking strategic, political, or economic support.” Technical military cooperation between Bolivia and Russia focuses on tactical training and instruction for Bolivian officers, since China is Bolivia’s main weapons provider. The Asian country has donated armored vehicles, communications systems, and funding for helicopters. “In this context, Russia is unlikely to depend on a country like Bolivia to position itself in the region. Bolivia doesn’t have Venezuela’s resources,” Rodríguez said. “Fragile economies can’t afford to purchase conventional military weapons and keep up a maintenance system for this kind of purchase.” Bolivia is important to Russia because of its natural reserves, Serrano said. Since 2016, Russian public and private companies are involved in gas and oil exploration projects in different Bolivian sites. The Kremlin also supports La Paz in building the Nuclear Technology Research and Development Center, which will open in El Alto before 2019 ends. Since 2000, Russia has made more than 43 state visits to Latin American countries. Half of these, Serrano said, were to countries of the so-called Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, comprising Venezuela, Nicaragua, Bolivia, and Cuba.​​​​​​​ Wild cards “Latin America isn’t a strategic priority for Russia or China,” Rodríguez said. “Nicaragua and Bolivia are ‘wild cards’ for these countries that play to move and disrupt other nations’ geopolitical interests.” For Rodríguez and Serrano, far from being the major source of weapons for Latin America, Russia wants to remain within the trading system, as it provides access to many defense and security networks and information on the region. “Moscow seeks to diversify its sources to get repositioned in Latin America and become a strategic player in the world,” Rodríguez concluded.
The Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation, approved by Russian President Vladimir Putin on November 30, 2016, is based on a diagnosis that “Global power and development potential is becoming decentralized, and is shifting toward the Asia-Pacific Region, eroding the global economic and political dominance of the traditional western powers.” The document goes on to say that “The attempts made by Western powers to maintain their positions in the world, including by imposing their point of view on global processes and conducting a policy to contain alternative centers of power, leads to a greater instability in international relations and growing turbulence on the global and regional levels.” The platform is part of a renewed international role for Russia, staked out by Putin after his re-election in 2012. That year, as explained by Paul Stronksi and Richard Sokolsky of the Carnegie Endowment’s Russia and Eurasia Program in The Return of Global Russia (2017), Moscow began to deploy a broad and effective international campaign to expand its influence. The objectives of this campaign were to weaken the global leadership of the United States by modifying the post-Cold War order, divide the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), increase Putin’s international and internal legitimacy, and promote Russian commercial, energy, economic and military interests. Recently, this strategy has led to an escalation of conflict with the West, evidenced both in Syria and Russian efforts to interfere in Western elections. Russia expert Dmitri Trenin defined this escalation as a new asymmetric Cold War, in which the absence of the specter of nuclear war leads the parties to more direct conflict in the economic, financial, political, and cyberspace spheres. To achieve its aims, Russia has adopted the role of a relevant actor or arbiter in various regional crises (Syria   and Ukraine) to maximize its geopolitical, military and economic influence, while at the same time developing a more systematic and long-term agenda of confrontation with the West, often within the framework of global alliances. However, as Aglaya Snetkov has pointed out, in today’s world, Russia remains on a secondary level; its limited geopolitical and economic resources—especially in contrast to China and the United States—forces Moscow to act in flexible and creative ways. Latin America has a role to play within Russia’s global repositioning efforts. Paragraph 98 of the Foreign Policy Concept states: Russia remains committed to the comprehensive strengthening of relations with the Latin American and Caribbean States taking into account the growing role of this region in global affairs. Russia will seek to consolidate ties with its Latin American partners by working within international and regional forums, expanding cooperation with multilateral associations and Latin American and Caribbean integration structures, including the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Southern Common Market, the Union of South American Nations, the Central American Integration System, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, the Pacific Alliance and the Caribbean Community.”
Moscow’s military, political and economic connections with Caracas have grown steadily in recent years. In the middle of an escalating national crisis, Venezuela reached an agreement with Russia in November 2017 to restructure debts for $3 billion. At the same time, Rosneft has invested $14 billion in the Venezuelan gas and oil industry. In February 2018, the ministers of economy of the two countries met in Moscow and expressed their interest in expanding commercial ties. Maduro’s initiative to create a cryptocurrency, the petro, backed by the country’s hydrocarbon reserves interests Moscow for two reasons: 1) Russia can take charge of the technological support for transactions and 2) both countries can take advantage of the petro to evade Western economic sanctions. Venezuela’s purchases of Russian-made products are still by far the most important in the region. From 2000 to 2010 alone, Moscow sold $11 billion in armaments to Caracas, including fighter-bombers, helicopters, transport planes, heavy tanks, armored cars, artillery, anti-aircraft and anti-submarine systems, radar, transport and logistic vehicles, and firearms. In April 2018, Venezuelan Defense Minister Vladimir Padrino participated in the 8th International Security Conference in Russia and met with his counterpart, Sergey Shoygu, to discuss military cooperation. Padrino told the press about Caracas’ interest in expanding the training exchange programs, beginning construction on a Venezuelan factory of AK-103 assault rifles, and opening a training center for pilots of Mi-17, Mi-35 and Mi-26 helicopters. The technology, doctrine and training provided by Moscow are largely responsible for the militarization of Venezuela’s internal politics and its possible geopolitical impacts. 
In Latin America, numerous variables favor the current Russian agenda. In comparison with the United States and Europe, Russia does not have an imperial past with respect to the countries of the Americas. Added to that is the ascendance of anti-American, anti-imperialist political forces throughout Latin America, as well as the neglect of the United States under the Trump administration’s policies of isolationism and aggressiveness toward the region. For two centuries, Latin America has seen the United States as a contradiction. On one hand, it is the imperial superpower that threatens its autonomy; on the other, it is the prosperous and open society that it envies. Young Latin Americans learn to repudiate the School of the Americas, but to admire the Civil Rights Movement. The most radical among us have cultivated a worldview of anti-imperialism that’s resistant to changes of epoch and the style of our neighboring hegemon; however, they are quick to forgive the intrusions of other powers. Paradoxically, these powers—whose history, culture and political regimes are so distant from bicentennial republicanism, democratic progressivism and Latin American social movements—are now very active in the region. China, with its overwhelming mix of capital investments, credit supply, and massive purchases of raw materials, is betting on a slow and firm advance. Russia, incapable of competing with the Chinese power, advances itself through technical-military collaboration and bilateral geopolitical alliances, and seeks to expand its cultural influence beyond the usual sympathizers.
In the coming year, Moscow will look to further relations with Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, and use these ties as launching points for extending its influence elsewhere in Central and South America. Bolivia-Russia relations have grown in recent years, primarily along political lines. Bolivia’s anti-U.S. stance—fueled by the 2008 tit-for-tat diplomatic expulsions amid civil unrest in Bolivia, which Morales blamed on the United States—aligns with Moscow’s posture and plays out most notably in the UN, where Bolivia is currently serving on the UN Security Council as a rotating member from 2017 to 2018. Moscow likely sees value in pursuing a closer relationship with Bolivia, based on Morales’s anti-U.S. stance and his vocal promotion of multipolarity in the international order. In the UN, Bolivia has followed Moscow’s lead in opposing U.S.-backed resolutions condemning chemical weapons use in Syria at least three times (April and October 2017 as well as April 2018). Morales was one of the first leaders to congratulate Putin on his March 2018 reelection victory and has spoken out in support of Moscow after Western countries’ expelled Russian diplomats following the poisoning incident in the UK.
In the coming year, Moscow will look to further relations with Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, and use these ties as launching points for extending its influence elsewhere in Central and South America. Bolivia-Russia relations have grown in recent years, primarily along political lines. Bolivia’s anti-U.S. stance—fueled by the 2008 tit-for-tat diplomatic expulsions amid civil unrest in Bolivia, which Morales blamed on the United States—aligns with Moscow’s posture and plays out most notably in the UN, where Bolivia is currently serving on the UN Security Council as a rotating member from 2017 to 2018. Moscow likely sees value in pursuing a closer relationship with Bolivia, based on Morales’s anti-U.S. stance and his vocal promotion of multipolarity in the international order. In the UN, Bolivia has followed Moscow’s lead in opposing U.S.-backed resolutions condemning chemical weapons use in Syria at least three times (April and October 2017 as well as April 2018). Morales was one of the first leaders to congratulate Putin on his March 2018 reelection victory and has spoken out in support of Moscow after Western countries’ expelled Russian diplomats following the poisoning incident in the UK. Cuba was Russia’s primary partner in the region during the Cold War and remains of great interest to Moscow because of its strategic location near the United States. In reengaging with Latin America, Moscow has focused its outreach efforts prominently on Cuba. Medvedev made trips there in 2008 and 2013, followed by Putin in 2014. Moscow has effectively financed much of Cuba’s military modernization, writing off $30 billion of Cuba’s Cold War–era debt and issuing new credits for the purchase of new equipment, including helicopters and fixed-wing military aircraft. In December 2016, Cuba and Russia agreed on a defense technology and modernization program for Cuba through 2020. Last fall, Russia and Cuba signed new agreements providing for Russian investment in Cuba’s railway system and in the energy sector. Rosneft began oil shipments to Cuba last year—to help compensate for the drop in Venezuelan oil—and is in discussions with Havana regarding access to onshore and offshore oil fields as well as refurnishing a local refinery. Benefits to Moscow for this assistance include the establishment of a GLONASS satellite communications facility—akin to the U.S. Global Positioning System—on Cuban territory. In addition, Russian military leaders have hinted at the possibility of returning to the Lourdes signals intelligence facility, a move that would boost Moscow’s intelligence collection capabilities against the United States. Cuba’s new leader, Miguel Díaz-Canel, faces the challenge of carrying on the Castro model without having the revolutionary credentials that gave Fidel and Raúl Castro credibility in their positions. In addition, Cuba is under significant strain economically, with growth stagnating and assistance from its close ally Venezuela dwindling. These pressures provide an opening for Russia to deepen its ties with the new leader.
In the coming year, Moscow will look to further relations with Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, and use these ties as launching points for extending its influence elsewhere in Central and South America. Bolivia-Russia relations have grown in recent years, primarily along political lines. Bolivia’s anti-U.S. stance—fueled by the 2008 tit-for-tat diplomatic expulsions amid civil unrest in Bolivia, which Morales blamed on the United States—aligns with Moscow’s posture and plays out most notably in the UN, where Bolivia is currently serving on the UN Security Council as a rotating member from 2017 to 2018. Moscow likely sees value in pursuing a closer relationship with Bolivia, based on Morales’s anti-U.S. stance and his vocal promotion of multipolarity in the international order. In the UN, Bolivia has followed Moscow’s lead in opposing U.S.-backed resolutions condemning chemical weapons use in Syria at least three times (April and October 2017 as well as April 2018). Morales was one of the first leaders to congratulate Putin on his March 2018 reelection victory and has spoken out in support of Moscow after Western countries’ expelled Russian diplomats following the poisoning incident in the UK. Cuba was Russia’s primary partner in the region during the Cold War and remains of great interest to Moscow because of its strategic location near the United States. In reengaging with Latin America, Moscow has focused its outreach efforts prominently on Cuba. Medvedev made trips there in 2008 and 2013, followed by Putin in 2014. Moscow has effectively financed much of Cuba’s military modernization, writing off $30 billion of Cuba’s Cold War–era debt and issuing new credits for the purchase of new equipment, including helicopters and fixed-wing military aircraft. In December 2016, Cuba and Russia agreed on a defense technology and modernization program for Cuba through 2020. Last fall, Russia and Cuba signed new agreements providing for Russian investment in Cuba’s railway system and in the energy sector. Rosneft began oil shipments to Cuba last year—to help compensate for the drop in Venezuelan oil—and is in discussions with Havana regarding access to onshore and offshore oil fields as well as refurnishing a local refinery. Benefits to Moscow for this assistance include the establishment of a GLONASS satellite communications facility—akin to the U.S. Global Positioning System—on Cuban territory. In addition, Russian military leaders have hinted at the possibility of returning to the Lourdes signals intelligence facility, a move that would boost Moscow’s intelligence collection capabilities against the United States. Cuba’s new leader, Miguel Díaz-Canel, faces the challenge of carrying on the Castro model without having the revolutionary credentials that gave Fidel and Raúl Castro credibility in their positions. In addition, Cuba is under significant strain economically, with growth stagnating and assistance from its close ally Venezuela dwindling. These pressures provide an opening for Russia to deepen its ties with the new leader. Nicaragua is Russia’s most steadfast political and military partner in the region. The relationship is built on years of Soviet support for President Daniel Ortega’s Sandinista movement in the 1980s. A renewed relationship began with Ortega’s return to power in 2007 and the country’s diplomatic recognition of the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the wake of the 2008 Georgian war. Nicaragua allowed Russian naval exercises to take place in its territorial waters later in 2008, and, in 2015, the Nicaraguan parliament voted to allow Russian warships to dock in Nicaraguan ports. Nicaragua has become reliant on Russian military support. The two countries in 2013 signed an agreement of Russian commitment to the modernization of Nicaragua’s military. Moscow has sold and donated equipment to the country, and has hosted Nicaraguan forces for training. Between 2012 and 2016, Russian arms made up 100 percent of Nicaragua’s imported arms purchases. Moscow sold Managua two military transport planes earlier this year for search and rescue operations, and opened a joint counternarcotics center in November 2017 from which to train and conduct operations in Nicaragua and later across the broader region. Managua has also agreed to house a GLONASS station on Nicaraguan territory. In the face of ongoing mass protests against government-approved social security reforms, Ortega is likely to look to Moscow for public as well as financial support to bolster his position and stabilize the country.
In the coming year, Moscow will look to further relations with Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, and use these ties as launching points for extending its influence elsewhere in Central and South America. Bolivia-Russia relations have grown in recent years, primarily along political lines. Bolivia’s anti-U.S. stance—fueled by the 2008 tit-for-tat diplomatic expulsions amid civil unrest in Bolivia, which Morales blamed on the United States—aligns with Moscow’s posture and plays out most notably in the UN, where Bolivia is currently serving on the UN Security Council as a rotating member from 2017 to 2018. Moscow likely sees value in pursuing a closer relationship with Bolivia, based on Morales’s anti-U.S. stance and his vocal promotion of multipolarity in the international order. In the UN, Bolivia has followed Moscow’s lead in opposing U.S.-backed resolutions condemning chemical weapons use in Syria at least three times (April and October 2017 as well as April 2018). Morales was one of the first leaders to congratulate Putin on his March 2018 reelection victory and has spoken out in support of Moscow after Western countries’ expelled Russian diplomats following the poisoning incident in the UK. Cuba was Russia’s primary partner in the region during the Cold War and remains of great interest to Moscow because of its strategic location near the United States. In reengaging with Latin America, Moscow has focused its outreach efforts prominently on Cuba. Medvedev made trips there in 2008 and 2013, followed by Putin in 2014. Moscow has effectively financed much of Cuba’s military modernization, writing off $30 billion of Cuba’s Cold War–era debt and issuing new credits for the purchase of new equipment, including helicopters and fixed-wing military aircraft. In December 2016, Cuba and Russia agreed on a defense technology and modernization program for Cuba through 2020. Last fall, Russia and Cuba signed new agreements providing for Russian investment in Cuba’s railway system and in the energy sector. Rosneft began oil shipments to Cuba last year—to help compensate for the drop in Venezuelan oil—and is in discussions with Havana regarding access to onshore and offshore oil fields as well as refurnishing a local refinery. Benefits to Moscow for this assistance include the establishment of a GLONASS satellite communications facility—akin to the U.S. Global Positioning System—on Cuban territory. In addition, Russian military leaders have hinted at the possibility of returning to the Lourdes signals intelligence facility, a move that would boost Moscow’s intelligence collection capabilities against the United States. Cuba’s new leader, Miguel Díaz-Canel, faces the challenge of carrying on the Castro model without having the revolutionary credentials that gave Fidel and Raúl Castro credibility in their positions. In addition, Cuba is under significant strain economically, with growth stagnating and assistance from its close ally Venezuela dwindling. These pressures provide an opening for Russia to deepen its ties with the new leader. Nicaragua is Russia’s most steadfast political and military partner in the region. The relationship is built on years of Soviet support for President Daniel Ortega’s Sandinista movement in the 1980s. A renewed relationship began with Ortega’s return to power in 2007 and the country’s diplomatic recognition of the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the wake of the 2008 Georgian war. Nicaragua allowed Russian naval exercises to take place in its territorial waters later in 2008, and, in 2015, the Nicaraguan parliament voted to allow Russian warships to dock in Nicaraguan ports. Nicaragua has become reliant on Russian military support. The two countries in 2013 signed an agreement of Russian commitment to the modernization of Nicaragua’s military. Moscow has sold and donated equipment to the country, and has hosted Nicaraguan forces for training. Between 2012 and 2016, Russian arms made up 100 percent of Nicaragua’s imported arms purchases. Moscow sold Managua two military transport planes earlier this year for search and rescue operations, and opened a joint counternarcotics center in November 2017 from which to train and conduct operations in Nicaragua and later across the broader region. Managua has also agreed to house a GLONASS station on Nicaraguan territory. In the face of ongoing mass protests against government-approved social security reforms, Ortega is likely to look to Moscow for public as well as financial support to bolster his position and stabilize the country. Venezuela Russia has stepped in over the last year to provide a political and financial lifeline to the Venezuelan government, in sharp contrast to the United States, which has threatened military intervention and is looking to increase pressure on the regime via sanctions. In November 2017, Russia agreed to refinance $3.15 billion in bilateral loans and delay almost all payments until after 2023, a delay that has given Caracas additional breathing room as it manages the consequences of defaulting on its sovereign debt. In return, Moscow is gaining preferential access to Venezuela’s enormous oil reserves—as well as leverage it could use to advance its interests when dealing with current and future Venezuelan governments. Russia’s Rosneft has played a lead role in supporting Venezuela’s energy sector and continues to expand its operations as foreign companies have retreated in the face of the slow-motion collapse of PDVSA, Venezuela’s state oil company. PDVSA has relied on Rosneft for prepayments of future oil deliveries to meet its financial commitments and to market physical volumes of Venezuelan crude to refiners in the United States and other countries. Russian engineers are involved in a number of PDVSA-Rosneft joint ventures. Last December, a Rosneft subsidiary won licenses to develop two offshore gas fields, and a Rosneft team is currently reviewing plans to take over the aging Amuay refinery. Maduro faces reelection on May 20 and will be looking for continued support from Moscow to secure his victory, despite Venezuela’s near economic and social collapse. While Moscow has an ally in Maduro, it is also likely positioning itself to maintain a presence amid a leadership transition. Upcoming events in Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, and Argentina present opportunities for Moscow to create problems or distractions for the United States with some of its closest partners.
In the coming year, Moscow will look to further relations with Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, and use these ties as launching points for extending its influence elsewhere in Central and South America. Bolivia-Russia relations have grown in recent years, primarily along political lines. Bolivia’s anti-U.S. stance—fueled by the 2008 tit-for-tat diplomatic expulsions amid civil unrest in Bolivia, which Morales blamed on the United States—aligns with Moscow’s posture and plays out most notably in the UN, where Bolivia is currently serving on the UN Security Council as a rotating member from 2017 to 2018. Moscow likely sees value in pursuing a closer relationship with Bolivia, based on Morales’s anti-U.S. stance and his vocal promotion of multipolarity in the international order. In the UN, Bolivia has followed Moscow’s lead in opposing U.S.-backed resolutions condemning chemical weapons use in Syria at least three times (April and October 2017 as well as April 2018). Morales was one of the first leaders to congratulate Putin on his March 2018 reelection victory and has spoken out in support of Moscow after Western countries’ expelled Russian diplomats following the poisoning incident in the UK. Cuba was Russia’s primary partner in the region during the Cold War and remains of great interest to Moscow because of its strategic location near the United States. In reengaging with Latin America, Moscow has focused its outreach efforts prominently on Cuba. Medvedev made trips there in 2008 and 2013, followed by Putin in 2014. Moscow has effectively financed much of Cuba’s military modernization, writing off $30 billion of Cuba’s Cold War–era debt and issuing new credits for the purchase of new equipment, including helicopters and fixed-wing military aircraft. In December 2016, Cuba and Russia agreed on a defense technology and modernization program for Cuba through 2020. Last fall, Russia and Cuba signed new agreements providing for Russian investment in Cuba’s railway system and in the energy sector. Rosneft began oil shipments to Cuba last year—to help compensate for the drop in Venezuelan oil—and is in discussions with Havana regarding access to onshore and offshore oil fields as well as refurnishing a local refinery. Benefits to Moscow for this assistance include the establishment of a GLONASS satellite communications facility—akin to the U.S. Global Positioning System—on Cuban territory. In addition, Russian military leaders have hinted at the possibility of returning to the Lourdes signals intelligence facility, a move that would boost Moscow’s intelligence collection capabilities against the United States. Cuba’s new leader, Miguel Díaz-Canel, faces the challenge of carrying on the Castro model without having the revolutionary credentials that gave Fidel and Raúl Castro credibility in their positions. In addition, Cuba is under significant strain economically, with growth stagnating and assistance from its close ally Venezuela dwindling. These pressures provide an opening for Russia to deepen its ties with the new leader. Nicaragua is Russia’s most steadfast political and military partner in the region. The relationship is built on years of Soviet support for President Daniel Ortega’s Sandinista movement in the 1980s. A renewed relationship began with Ortega’s return to power in 2007 and the country’s diplomatic recognition of the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the wake of the 2008 Georgian war. Nicaragua allowed Russian naval exercises to take place in its territorial waters later in 2008, and, in 2015, the Nicaraguan parliament voted to allow Russian warships to dock in Nicaraguan ports. Nicaragua has become reliant on Russian military support. The two countries in 2013 signed an agreement of Russian commitment to the modernization of Nicaragua’s military. Moscow has sold and donated equipment to the country, and has hosted Nicaraguan forces for training. Between 2012 and 2016, Russian arms made up 100 percent of Nicaragua’s imported arms purchases. Moscow sold Managua two military transport planes earlier this year for search and rescue operations, and opened a joint counternarcotics center in November 2017 from which to train and conduct operations in Nicaragua and later across the broader region. Managua has also agreed to house a GLONASS station on Nicaraguan territory. In the face of ongoing mass protests against government-approved social security reforms, Ortega is likely to look to Moscow for public as well as financial support to bolster his position and stabilize the country. Venezuela Russia has stepped in over the last year to provide a political and financial lifeline to the Venezuelan government, in sharp contrast to the United States, which has threatened military intervention and is looking to increase pressure on the regime via sanctions. In November 2017, Russia agreed to refinance $3.15 billion in bilateral loans and delay almost all payments until after 2023, a delay that has given Caracas additional breathing room as it manages the consequences of defaulting on its sovereign debt. In return, Moscow is gaining preferential access to Venezuela’s enormous oil reserves—as well as leverage it could use to advance its interests when dealing with current and future Venezuelan governments. Russia’s Rosneft has played a lead role in supporting Venezuela’s energy sector and continues to expand its operations as foreign companies have retreated in the face of the slow-motion collapse of PDVSA, Venezuela’s state oil company. PDVSA has relied on Rosneft for prepayments of future oil deliveries to meet its financial commitments and to market physical volumes of Venezuelan crude to refiners in the United States and other countries. Russian engineers are involved in a number of PDVSA-Rosneft joint ventures. Last December, a Rosneft subsidiary won licenses to develop two offshore gas fields, and a Rosneft team is currently reviewing plans to take over the aging Amuay refinery. Maduro faces reelection on May 20 and will be looking for continued support from Moscow to secure his victory, despite Venezuela’s near economic and social collapse. While Moscow has an ally in Maduro, it is also likely positioning itself to maintain a presence amid a leadership transition. Upcoming events in Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, and Argentina present opportunities for Moscow to create problems or distractions for the United States with some of its closest partners. Brazil The Russia-Brazil relationship is centered on bilateral trade and commercial ties but also involves cooperation within the BRICS organization. Bilateral trade has been on the rise, reaching $4.3 billion in 2016, and consists of Russian imports of food and agricultural items and exports of fertilizer, mineral fuels, and metals. In 2016, Russia purchased 90 percent of its imported pork from Brazil and 55 percent of its imported beef from Brazil and Paraguay. President Michel Temer visited Moscow last year to discuss opportunities to expand bilateral trade and investment. The economic relationship between the two countries has been complemented by regular high-level leadership meetings, and by coordination and support for each other in multilateral organizations. Brazil, for example, abstained from voting against Russia in a 2014 UN resolution condemning Russia’s actions in Crimea, and Russia is a key supporter of Brazil’s candidacy for a permanent seat on the UN Security Council. Brazil will hold its presidential election in October 2018. With frontrunner Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva arrested for corruption, the contest is now wide open amid a highly polarized political environment flooded with social media and fake news. A recent study of social media interference in Brazil’s 2014 election by the Rio de Janeiro–based think tank FGV DAPP uncovered a significant automated network that included Twitter profiles with readily identifiable Russian iconography and Russian-language materials. These botnets operated in support of a candidate whose views were not aligned with Moscow politically and appear to have been part of a commercially arranged effort on behalf of the candidate. This discovery has raised concerns about Russia’s ability to interfere in this year’s contest and also whether these techniques were later refined and deployed as part of Russian information operations in geographical regions that are of greater interest to the Kremlin.3 Moscow’s Red Square serves as background photo for an automated Twitter profile that supported a 2014 Brazilian presidential candidate. This was one of many suspicious Russia-linked profiles uncovered by the Brazilian think tank FGV DAPP. Mexico Mexico-Russia relations today are modest, but U.S. government threats to abolish NAFTA and to crack down on immigration have created fissures in the relationship between Mexico City and Washington that open the door to Russian exploitation. Russia has ramped up its Mexico-related programming in recent months as part of an effort to lend support to presidential candidate Andrés Manuel López Obrador’s campaign in the upcoming July 1 election. Since last year, RT has been broadcasting Spanish-language programming favorable to López Obrador, the populist frontrunner. Other state-run Russian outlets, such as Sputnik, parrot these pro–López Obrador narratives and are available in a variety of online formats to the nearly 60 percent of Mexicans who have internet access or are on social media. Moscow likely views López Obrador as a potential ally given his populist anti-U.S. views. As Carnegie scholar Andrew Weiss described in an Atlantic article earlier this year, by devoting propaganda resources to him, Moscow seeks to promote a divisive, anti-U.S. campaign in the run-up to Mexico’s election. The Mexican vote is also vulnerable to cyber meddling. El Universal cites an internal Mexican government report that outlines vulnerabilities in the new electronic voting system that has been designed to enable Mexicans to cast their ballots from overseas. More generally, Moscow likely sees the Mexican presidential election as an opportunity to retaliate for perceived U.S. interference in the internal politics of former Soviet states. In the economic realm, Mexico is preparing for the potential unraveling of NAFTA and looking to Russia as one of several alternatives to U.S. trade and energy ties. Russian expertise in the fertilizer industry and in energy extraction and processing would complement Mexico’s economic needs. Mexico’s state-run oil company Pemex is looking to privatize some of its components; Russia’s Lukoil has expanded its oil production in the Gulf of Mexico after having won two tenders from the Mexican government over the past year. Moreover, although many Latin American countries welcome Chinese investment, Mexico’s relationship with China is more cautious, as the two countries have in recent years competed for access to the U.S. market. This wariness makes the prospect of commercial deals with Russian entities more attractive.
March 21 (UPI) -- Bolivia's President Evo Morales will travel to Moscow in July in part to seek closer cooperation between Gazprom and his country's state owned natural gas industry, the nation's top revenue earner. Bolivia's Foreign Minister Diego Pary said Bolivia is working on agreements for "cooperation with Gazprom and investment into the Center for Nuclear Research" ahead of Morales' visit in July, Tass reported Wednesday. Morales, who received the invitation to visit in February, last traveled to Moscow in July for an official visit with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Bolivia's Morales re-nationalized the country's hydrocarbon industry in 2006, at a time when the country had one of the region's biggest gas resources. The nationalization came just after Morales won the Bolivian presidency at a time of political turbulence, including deadly protests in 2003 over plans by former President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada to export the gas. Morales, helped by greater flows after nationalization led to renewed contracts that brought its natural gas pricing to international market levels, has in recent years invested to add value to the gas in projects such as chemical fertilizers. Morales said in January that Bolivia is exporting liquid petroleum gas -- or LPG, normally used as cooking gas -- in containers to Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Peru. Before the nationalization, Bolivia only exported natural gas or methane, but had to import LPG in canisters, while prices paid for the methane were very low. Bolivia has about 11 trillion cubic feet of natural gas of reserves. The country's economy, unlike some of its neighbors, has expanded in recent years with increased revenues fueled by higher energy prices. Gazprom, majority owned by the government of Russia, is involved in extraction, production, transportation and sale of natural gas. Gazprom is the largest gas supplier to Europe and Turkey. It also has a 30-year contract to supply China, with gas to be shipped as soon as the Power of Siberia pipeline under construction is completed later this year. Bolivia is politically aligned in Latin America with Cuba and Venezuela.
Russia has set out to enhance its influence across Latin America, once a Western bastion of Soviet support, as hopes of a rapprochement with the United States fade and a new, risky plan to counter its global influence is put into place. The appearance of nuclear-capable Tupolev Tu-160 strategic bombers in Venezuela last month garnered much media attention as the Russian flight coincided with a hardening U.S. stance against the ailing, socialist-led South American nation and White House threats to withdraw from a Cold War-era treaty banning the deployment of intermediate-range missiles. Days later, in a development even more reminiscent of that historic battle of superpowers, a report surfaced in the Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper suggesting that Moscow may commit to establishing a full-fledged base on its ally off of the Caribbean. Russia has also reached out to other left-wing nations Nicaragua and Cuba, where talks of a potential Russian military installation were similarly floated by officials. These three socialist states in the region form what White House national security adviser John Bolton dubbed the "troika of tyranny" in a November speech in Miami. Bolton, the architect of the extended "axis of evil," which included Cuba and Libya alongside Iran, Iraq and North Korea in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, vowed a hard line against these governments. As President Donald Trump's promises of a reset in U.S.-Russia ties continue to more closely resemble a hardening of the world's leading military powers toward one another, Russian President Vladimir Putin is looking west to test the extent of his country's resurgent global clout, and the limits of his rival's commitment to pursuing goals seen by Moscow as provocations in its own backyard.
The U.S. has an extensive history of intervention in Latin America, where nearly every country has been deeply affected in some way, shape or form by Washington's policies. The U.S. military became especially engaged in the mid-20th-century as leftist movements mobilized against foreign influence, prompting Washington to back coups against leftist leaders and sponsor right-wing state suppression to stamp out socialist activities. These events, which peaked with Central America's bloody civil wars in the 1980s, served as ripe propaganda for the Soviet Union and its global supporters, who painted the U.S. as an imperialist power. This U.S. role continued through the 21st century, albeit in a more muted fashion. The reign of late Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez nearly came to a sudden end after a 2002 coup that was later shown to have ties to the CIA. Chávez, already an outspoken critic of Washington, held on to this grudge for the rest of his life, blaming the U.S. for its hostile stance even as his nation's economy collapsed under an economic crisis. After his death, in 2013, Nicolás Maduro continued to blame the U.S. under even more dire financial circumstances and, under Trump, in the face of an administration that publicly toyed with the idea of regime change. Russia's incentive for expanding its interest in the Western hemisphere is clear amid the current geopolitical security climate. As Vladimir Rouvinski, the director of the Center for Inter-Disciplinary Studies at Colombia's Icesi University, explained to Newsweek, Latin America represents the "near abroad" for Washington much in the same way that Europe, a continent that has become dominated by the U.S.-led NATO Western military alliance, does to Moscow. The Kremlin has long viewed the so-called "color revolutions" that shook former Soviet Republics and the Balkans as being directly linked to U.S. meddling. This suspicion of Washington's involvement abroad only grew as the U.S. backed efforts to overthrow governments across the Middle East, where Sunni Muslim insurgencies quickly erupted in the resulting instability. As Russia intervened in Syria and Ukraine to thwart what it considered Western plots against its interests, Moscow may be gearing up to preempt any sort of U.S. action against Venezuela—where Maduro claimed during a speech Wednesday that he was facing a coup attempt by U.S.-backed Colombia and its allies—while at the same time promoting its own agenda abroad.
"I think Russia clearly sees Venezuela as an important piece of its foreign policy, and not without reason," David Smilde, a sociologist and Latin America expert at Tulane University and a senior fellow at the Washington Office on Latin America, told Newsweek. "It is taking advantage of a country that is desperate for support, to secure lucrative contracts providing access to Venezuela's energy assets and more recently gold. In the process, it can use Venezuela to pressure the United States. "The recent visit to Venezuela by nuclear-capable bombers is a Russian reminder to U.S. President Donald Trump of what could happen if he pulls out of the 30-year-old nuclear non-proliferation START treaty," he added. "In addition, Putin's foreign policy largely amounts to supporting authoritarian governments worldwide, that can be presented as a network of allies with alternative forms of governance, which he can use to deflect demands at home for more democratic rule." The objectives line up, but as Smilde noted, "None of this translates into broader Russian influence in the region. To the contrary, a number of countries have expressed alarm." Moscow's outreach has yet to translate into a tangible military presence and would likely find fertile ground only in countries actually still touting the anti-imperialist fervor that swept Latin America during the Cold War and once again with the so-called "pink tide" of the late 1990s and early 2000s. More recently, the continent was gripped by a conservative wave that has had an opposite effect for countries like Brazil, which has just shaken off a left-leaning leadership in a radical swing to the right. The election of far-right Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro has, in fact, given the U.S. a new ally in the region. A vocal critic of leftist ideology across Latin America, Bolsonaro said just last week that he was considering inviting the Pentagon to build a base in Brazil in response to Russia's embrace of countries such as Venezuela.
In line with major U.S. fears of Russian and Chinese influence popping up around the world, Air Force Chief of Staff General David Goldfein said in November that "we are looking at cooperation where we can and pushing back aggressively where we must" and that, in Latin America, "certainly we keep an eye on their activities." Still, the Trump administration's failure to nominate ambassadors for several regional countries, including Brazil, and various shakeups in Washington have damaged trust in U.S. commitment as Moscow presented itself as an alternative. Russia has experimented with expanding Latin American ties on prior occasions, as it did with a regional naval tour in 2008, but failed to follow through with any broader plans. Rouvinski said that previous outreach centered around pressuring the U.S. at a time when relations between the countries were more amicable. But, as he explains, "This time Russia is losing all hope that it would be possible to improve relations with the United States." The Russian Admiral Chabanenko destroyer arrives at Havana's harbor, on December 19, 2008. A group of Russian warships embarked on a tour of Latin America as part of a five-day visit close to U.S. waters seen as a response to Washington’s own moves in areas Russia deems within its sphere of influence.
As Smilde noted, Russia's growing pessimism was partially rooted in the State Department's apparent silence over Russian attempts to begin negotiations for renewing the START agreement that limits the nuclear arsenals of both countries. Trump has voiced opposition to deals made by prior administrations and has already vowed to scrap the 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty that bans the deployment of nuclear and conventional missile systems with ranges between roughly 310 and 3,400 miles—far less than the distance between Washington and Caracas. Writing for The Hill last week, RAND Corp senior fellow and former U.S. diplomat William Courtney argued, "If Russia were to seek to station nuclear forces or infrastructure in the hemisphere, a major diplomatic and military crisis could develop." "Russia is increasing its role in impoverished Venezuela by acquiring sizable oil and gold assets in return for cash bailouts," Courtney added, noting that recent Russian diplomatic "remarks suggest that military ties may also thicken. In case they do, the U.S. might wish to develop contingency policy options." Trump's disregard for arms control treaties has also inspired comparisons to the Cuban Missile Crisis among officials in Moscow. This 1962 standoff occurred when the U.S. blocked Soviet ships carrying missile components to secret sites on the Caribbean island and was only settled after Washington agreed to withdraw its own weapons from Turkey in exchange for Moscow's dismantling of the positions in Cuba. At the time, the Soviet Union had a global reach and often conducted the kinds of Caribbean deployments seen last month alongside Venezuela, while NATO's reach did not extend nearly as far east in Europe. With Russia rebuilding its international might, however, Putin vowed to "restore balance" in the military sphere should the U.S. scrap the INF. For now, Moscow's footprint remained comparatively limited to what its resources would allow, including soft power initiatives like the growing popularity of Russian cultural centers and state-run networks like RT. Rouvinski noted, however, that Russia was likely to escalate "if the price was right." "This is kind of a crossroads for Russia," Rouvinski told Newsweek. "As long as relations with the U.S. are tense, Russia will do what it takes to pressure it in Latin America."
While relations between the United States and Russia have deteriorated in recent years, making it exceedingly difficult for both countries to collaborate in managing a variety of common concerns, emerging challenges to global order make such cooperation increasingly imperative. To explore where U.S.-Russia cooperation is desirable and, in some places, even necessary, the Center for Preventive Action at the Council on Foreign Relations convened an international group of twenty-three experts at the Tufts University European Center in Talloires, France, on June 9 and 10, 2017, for the workshop “Managing Global Disorder: Prospects for U.S.-Russian Cooperation.”  Workshop participants assessed U.S., Russian, and West European views of the sources of global disorder and identified potential areas of strategic cooperation that might help build a more solid foundation for mutual trust and security. They also discussed areas where these actors can work together on regional concerns in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. Participants agreed that, for all the friction and disagreement that currently affects U.S.-Russia relations, the situation could easily grow much worse. A further deterioration of the relationship would not only harm each country’s own interests but would also make the collective management of other sources of global disorder much harder in the future. Threats to World Order and Perspectives on Global Norms Participants concurred that the international order that has prevailed since the end of the Cold War is changing, though what will take its place remains unclear. New powers are emerging or reemerging on the world stage in ways that are causing friction and uncertainty. Nonstate actors are also growing more powerful and, in some cases, more dangerous. Collectively, these developments are placing growing stress on the established international norms and institutions that help to promote global order. Differences were evident in how U.S. and Russian participants interpreted these recent developments and the causes of growing international turbulence. To some, the principal source of instability has been the overzealous actions of the United States—particularly in the wake of 9/11—in promoting democracy, human rights, and regime change around the world in contravention of established principles of state sovereignty. To others, the disruptive and uneven consequences of globalization were the leading culprit. As a result, participants were also divided on prescriptions for restoring global order: to some, it involved returning to traditional notions of noninterference in the domestic affairs of states while others explored new obligations of state sovereignty in recognition of evolving requirements. There was general agreement, however, that established global institutions need to be reformed and reinvigorated if they are to survive well into the twenty-first century. Trump and Putin meeting at G20 in 2017 Participants largely agreed that taking incremental steps toward cooperation would be the best approach to improving U.S.-Russian relations, with the hope that these steps would build momentum toward further improvement. While legally binding agreements would be difficult to achieve in the current political climate, and legally binding multilateral agreements next to impossible, the United States and Russia could pursue more informal arrangements to work together. Future cooperation in whatever form is unlikely, however, without a mutual recognition of interests. One participant argued that the United States needed to acknowledge Russia’s legitimate interests, claiming that, currently, “the fact that Russia has legitimate interests is little accepted in the United States.” Other participants pointed out that, while Russia has made some of its red lines clear (such as NATO or EU membership for certain states on its border), it has not officially communicated what its legitimate interests are. Legally binding agreements would be difficult to achieve in the current political climate. Nonetheless, participants identified areas where the United States and Russia could work together to foster stability and order, both in strategic and regional concerns. Strategic Cooperation All participants agreed on the importance of maintaining strategic stability and the integrity of existing global arms control regimes. Finding ways to reinforce these regimes while creating incentives for other nuclear weapons states to join them was also a focus of the discussion. In April 2010, U.S. President Barack Obama and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev agreed on a nuclear arms reduction treaty, known as the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START). The treaty, which set limits on U.S. and Russian strategic arms, is set to expire in 2021 but it can be extended for up to five years. Some in the U.S. and Russian leadership support extending New START (though in a February 2017 phone to call to President Vladimir Putin, President Donald J. Trump denounced the agreement). One participant characterized the extension as “low-hanging fruit” that is attractive to both sides and would foster stability and predictability not just between the United States and Russia but also among other nuclear weapons states, notably China. Participants noted the difficulties of making the extension legally binding, particularly if the United States and Russia hope to include other states in the regime, but argued that there would be benefits to a nonbinding political agreement to extend the treaty. One participant also argued that entering into dialogue about strategic stability is useful in and of itself and could also be utilized as a forum for military-to-military dialogue. Another important arms control agreement between the United States and Russia is the Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which prohibits the development of intermediate-range missiles. While both the United States and Russia have been accused of violating the agreement, several participants argued for the need to preserve it. Renegotiating the INF Treaty would be difficult and thus the best option would be to clarify its terms and reach new understandings to ensure compliance and attract other adherents. In areas of strategic significance such as the development of offensive nuclear weapons, missile defense systems, cyberwarfare capabilities, and the use of outer space, participants agreed that the United States and Russia should focus on limiting worst-case scenarios. Additional transparency and confidence-building measures to reduce the grounds for mistrust and misunderstandings in crisis situations were generally seen as desirable. Regional Cooperation: Europe NATO expansion, the conflict in Ukraine, and Moscow’s intervention in European political processes are sources of tension among the United States, Russia, and Western Europe. Russian participants highlighted the divergent understandings of European security, arguing that while U.S. interventions in European states are considered stabilizing from a U.S. perspective, Russia considers such action disruptive to stability in Europe. As with strategic issues, participants agreed that both sides should recognize the danger in the current situation in Europe and work on low-cost improvement measures, such as restoring military-to-military dialogue and mutually recognizing that the Trump administration does not seek regime change in Russia. NATO enlargement could also be an area of agreement, should Russia agree to respect the freedom of states to pursue NATO membership and the United States focuses on the security rationale for joining the alliance. The two countries could also agree to refrain from influencing other nations’ political outcomes or election results and to not use cyberattacks, smear campaigns, opposition movements, or other actions that would result in an “unpleasant surprise” at the end of an election campaign. Participants discussed whether resolving the conflict in Ukraine is necessary to improving U.S.-Russian relations. While participants were not optimistic that the conflict could be resolved soon, they generally agreed that its resolution is not essential to improving U.S.-Russian relations. A stalemate could be accepted for the time being to allow both sides to focus on other issues where they are not in direct competition. Regional Cooperation: Middle East, Central Asia, and Asia-Pacific Participants identified encouraging areas where the United States and Russia could work together in regions beyond Europe. Middle East Many participants considered the prospects for cooperation in the Middle East to be promising. Both the United States and Russia have a significant presence in Syria and share an interest in resolving the country’s civil war. And although Iran’s involvement in Syria will remain a source of disagreement between Washington and Moscow, cooperation is not impossible. While Iran is a strategic Russian ally, one participant pointed out that neither the United States nor Russia are ultimately interested in supporting Iranian ambitions in the region. None of the actors involved in Syria have a clear vision for an outcome to the conflict, but some participants argued that Russia’s interests there—including preserving Syria’s statehood, creating stability, and ending the fighting—do not necessarily conflict with U.S. interests, so an agreement on a final political resolution to the conflict is not necessary for cooperation at this stage. Moreover, Russia has an interest in maintaining a U.S. role in negotiations. However, cooperation would depend on the United States communicating its objectives in Syria, which are not currently clear. None of the actors involved in Syria have a clear vision for an outcome to the conflict. Central Asia Participants generally agreed that the United States will not have a strong role in former Soviet states in Central Asia compared to Russia and China, and therefore prospects for cooperation in the region are limited. The region is also not a source of tension between Moscow and Beijing because Chinese involvement in the region does not currently challenge Russian political influence: Russia provides security and employment for Central Asians, while China provides economic development but no competing jobs for locals. Participants identified Afghanistan as a possible area for cooperation. The U.S. goal (political reconciliation) and the Russian goal (eliminating instability on its border) are complementary. However, like in Syria, cooperation depends on clarifying U.S. policy and objectives in the country. Asia-Pacific Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific is limited, as the United States has a larger role in the region than Russia does. While the United States seeks to challenge Chinese territorial claims, maintain a strong military presence, and reinforce alliances in the region, Russian policy is to not oppose China. Chinese-Russian relations are aided by China’s treatment of Russia not as a junior partner in light of its decline and China’s rise, but as an equal. Even given any mutual suspicion between the two states, they will continue to cooperate to resist U.S. influence in the region. While participants noted that U.S. and Russian leaders should cooperate to address the threat from North Korea, the lack of leverage on all sides to influence the regime will remain an obstacle.
Amid a week of attention-grabbing drama about the dysfunction of Donald Trump’s presidency, it almost escaped notice that his administration is putting U.S. troops in harm’s way in a foreign war for a new purpose—a purpose that does not entail countering a threat to the United States. Newly appointed special envoy for Syria James Jeffrey stated that under a “new policy” on Syria, the United States is “no longer pulling out by the end of the year.” This policy goes against what Trump had been saying not only in the presidential campaign about wanting less U.S. involvement in Middle Eastern wars but also, more recently and more specifically, about wanting to withdraw the 2,200 U.S. soldiers now in Syria. Those troops have been in the northeastern part of the country, hitherto focused on aiding the fight against the so-called Islamic State (ISIS or IS). But now, according to Jeffrey, besides mopping up the remnants of IS’s former mini-state in eastern Syria, U.S. troops are to stay in Syria indefinitely with the objective of ejecting from the country all troops of Syria’s ally Iran. Administration officials say that a motivation for the new policy is growing doubt that Russia will be either able or willing to assist in such an ejection. The new policy is an entirely new war aim, not an extension or corollary of the prior declared purpose of combating IS. In fact, Iran’s presence in Syria, aimed at supporting the Bashar al-Assad regime, has been on the opposite side of the Syrian civil war from IS, which has aimed to overthrow that regime. Hawks in the administration have been talking for some time, of course, about confronting and opposing Iran any way and anywhere they can, but Jeffrey’s statement marks an official departure from what had been a U.S. war objective in Syria exclusively focused on IS. An Unscrutinized War Aim That shift warrants much more scrutiny and debate than it is getting. U.S. service members are being dispatched to a foreign war for the purpose of somehow getting one Middle Eastern state that has had a longstanding security relationship with another Middle Eastern state to remove its personnel from that second state. Exactly how are U.S. interests supposedly affected by whether those personnel stay or go? The only Americans who might be harmed under one scenario but not the other are the very soldiers who are being dispatched. The Syrian-Iranian alliance has existed for decades, going back to when the two states shared an adversary in the form of Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq. The issue is not only whether U.S. interests are affected but whether they are affected enough to justify the participation of the U.S. military in a foreign war—which should entail a higher standard. Suppose that Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution were observed, as it ought to be but generally is not, and that a congressional declaration of war preceded involvement of the U.S. military in any foreign war. Suppose further that when an already deployed U.S. force is given an entirely different mission, that this mission and the deployment intended to serve it are given a thorough zero-based review—which it ought to be but generally is not. Would the elected representatives of the American people vote to send U.S. soldiers into a war for the purpose of getting a Middle Eastern state to move some of its own troops from point A to point B (troops that had gone to point A not as invaders but instead to assist the incumbent government)? Probably not, despite years of rhetoric depicting Iran as evil incarnate. To be fair, withdrawing an already deployed U.S. expeditionary force is not entirely the same as deploying one afresh, whether or not the mission has changed. When Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger inherited the Vietnam War in 1969, their task was not centered on the question of whether the war had been a good or a bad idea in the first place but instead on how to extract a half-million-man army in a way that could plausibly be presented as “peace with honor.” But the scale of extraction and of the associated emotions and politics involving sunk costs are vastly different with the small U.S. force in Syria. Any legitimate issues about extraction there should focus on the previously established mission of mopping up IS. No Good Solutions The Syrian war always has been, and still is, a problem with no good solutions as far as U.S. policy is concerned. Robert Malley, who coordinated Middle Eastern policy in the Obama White House, describes Syria as a “failure” for the administration in which he worked. The agonizing over Syria is likely to accelerate in the coming days as the Syrian regime attempts to capture Idlib province, the last major remaining redoubt of rebel forces, and one to which many fighters ousted from other rebel enclaves had earlier repaired. Ignoring uncomfortable truths about the Syria conflict keeps getting in the way of sober policy-making. The regime, aided by its Russian and Iranian allies, already has recaptured most rebel-held territory. Probably the shortest route to mitigating further suffering from this war—in which upwards of a half million people have died and millions more have been displaced—is for government forces to complete the victory that they are well on the way to achieving. But the brutal and disagreeable nature of the Assad regime has made that prospect a nonstarter as a basis for (openly avowed) U.S. policy-making, even if the “Assad must go” slogan has quietly been retired. Idlib presents more uncomfortable truths. Although Syria, Russia, and Iran routinely describe all Syrian rebels as “terrorists” in their propaganda, the label fits to a large degree in Idlib. The strongest armed group in Idlib, and the de facto ruler over most of the province, is Hei’at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), which is the latest name of the al-Qaeda affiliate in Syria. A regime offensive in Idlib may indeed bring about the grievous casualties and displacements about which many commentators are currently warning. But a successful offensive also would end the inhumane local rule of HTS, which has featured mass arrests, secret prisons, and torture. Finding the least bad solution must involve multilateral diplomacy, given the number of external actors involved in the conflict. The most important players in that diplomacy have been Russia, Iran, and Turkey, although the presidents of those three countries failed to achieve any breakthrough agreement on Syria in a summit meeting they just held in Tehran. All three have stronger interests in Syria than does the United States. For both Russia and Iran, Syria represents the single biggest, longest, and friendliest relationship either regime has enjoyed in the Arab world. For Turkey, Syria presents a host of immediate problems, including more than three million Syrian refugees already on its soil, the prospect of still more from fighting in Idlib, border security issues, and the Kurdish question. The U.S. fixation on opposing and isolating Iran at every opportunity makes the difficult task of finding the least bad solution to the Syrian war even more difficult. The fixation was impeding Syria-related diplomacy even before the Trump administration took office. It was not until October 2015, three months after the multilateral agreement restricting Iran’s nuclear program was signed, that the Obama administration ended the longstanding U.S. objection to Iranian participation in Syrian peace talks sponsored by the United Nations. Jeffrey and other Trump administration officials have not explained how keeping those U.S. troops in Syria will help achieve a withdrawal of Iranian personnel. Conceivably they could function as a bargaining chip, with a hope of achieving some agreement about withdrawal of all foreign forces from Syria. But two can play that game. Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said at the summit meeting in Tehran not only that “fighting terrorism in Idlib is an unavoidable part of the mission of restoring peace and stability to Syria” but also that “we have to force the United States to leave” Syria. In that game, Iran, as noted above, has a stronger incentive to keep playing than does the United States. The principal effect of keeping those American soldiers in Syria indefinitely, with opposing Iran as their new mission, is to increase the chance of a direct U.S.-Iranian military clash, possibly escalating into a major war. That’s not good, even though it might be what some in power want.
ISTANBUL — Syrian government and allied Russian warplanes on Monday intensified a week-long bombardment of Idlib province, targeting hospitals and other civilian infrastructure as tens of thousands of residents fled toward the border with Turkey, activists and monitors in the rebel-held region said. The aerial campaign has killed about 100 civilians and put at least 10 hospitals out of service.  It has raised fears that Syrian government forces, supported by Russia and Iranian-backed fighters, are preparing an all-out offensive in Idlib — the last area in the country controlled by rebels opposed to President Bashar al-Assad. The airstrikes represent the latest and fiercest challenge to a pact brokered by Russian President Vladimir Putin and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan last year that was designed to avert all-out conflict in the northwestern province. On Monday, government helicopters dropped 13 barrel bombs in southern areas of Idlib and northern pockets of neighboring Hama province while Russian jets carried out at least 33 airstrikes in the region, according to the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. The uptick in hostilities has prompted an exodus of about 200,000 of Idlib’s 3 million residents toward the sealed Turkish border, in what the Union of Medical Care and Relief Organizations, a U.S.-based aid group, has described as the beginning of an “Apocalyptic scenario.” “The southern countryside of Idlib is almost empty because of the destructive shelling that targeted the whole area,” said a 38-year-old activist from Idlib who asked to be identified by the nickname Abu Muhammad. “It is brutal what is happening.” Abu Muhammad and others in the sprawling province said they expect the government and allied Iranian militias to soon launch a ground assault, which would mark the beginning of the final and largest battle waged by Assad to wrest back territory lost to rebels since the start of Syria’s civil war. It would also spell the breakdown of the Russian-Turkish agreement that took hold in October. The cease-fire called for a nine-mile demilitarized zone in Idlib. It has been repeatedly violated by both sides, but the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights has described the latest escalation as the “fiercest.” The European Union and the United Nations last week called on Russia and Turkey to preserve the cease-fire, while the State Department issued a statement warning that the situation threatens to destabilize the region. “We call on all parties, including Russia and the Syrian regime, to abide by their commitments to avoid large scale military offensives, return to a de-escalation of violence in the area, and allow for unhindered humanitarian access to address the humanitarian disaster created by the ongoing violence,” State Department spokesman Morgan Ortagus said in the statement. Syrian officials quoted in state media have said the operations in Idlib are in response to attacks by al-Qaeda-linked militants that killed 22 government troops and allied militiamen late last month. Idlib province is dominated by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, or HTS, a hard-line group affiliated until recently with al-Qaeda. Turkey-backed Syrian rebels in Idlib said the intensifying airstrikes are probably tied to a growing economic crisis in government-controlled areas, driven by U.S. and E.U. sanctions. According to rebels interviewed by Reuters, Assad and Russia are keen to reclaim two key highways that link Idlib to major cities controlled by the government and serve as vital commercial routes between Syria’s borders with Jordan in the south and Turkey in the north. Abu Muhammad, the activist in Idlib, said harsh economic conditions — including fuel shortages in Damascus, the capital — are provoking Assad and Russia to project strength through military action. “Regime areas are suffering from a huge economic crisis,” he said. “Civilians in regime-controlled areas have started to complain about it. . . . So the regime wants to distract everyone with this battle.”
In a Middle East already aflame, a fresh feud between Saudi Arabia and Iran threatens to complicate almost every major issue from the Iranian nuclear deal to the Syrian civil war to global oil markets. These are all U.S. priorities, and the Obama administration finds itself staring at another Middle Eastern conundrum. White House spokesman Josh Earnest on Monday called on Iran and Saudi Arabia to exercise restraint and offered mild criticism of both. His language pointed to the difficult position facing the administration. If the U.S. sides openly with its longtime ally Saudi Arabia, it will antagonize Iran, where President Obama has sought to move past decades of relentless hostility. Yet if the White House opts for a balanced approach, Saudi Arabia could take it as an insult, feeling its close relationship with Washington is being sacrificed as part of U.S. outreach to Iran. Saudi Arabia sees itself as the standard-bearer of Sunni Islam, and Iran regards itself as the defender of Shiite Muslims everywhere. Their sectarian competition has been a fundamental fault line in the Middle East for decades. In broad strokes, the rivalry ramped up dramatically after Iran's 1979 Islamic Revolution and its efforts to export its brand of radical Islam among Shiites, a minority in the Muslim world that often feels oppressed by the far larger Sunni population. As Iran has sought greater influence, Sunnis have pushed back. The rivalry has only intensified during the Middle East uprisings of the past several years, with the Saudis and Iranians waging proxy battles on multiple fronts. The latest friction comes at a key moment for both states. Iranian President Hassan Rouhani was elected in 2013 with a pledge to open up his country to the outside world, revive the economy and pursue at least limited social reforms. Saudi Arabia's King Salman ascended the throne just last year and has shown signs of acting in a more decisive manner than his predecessors. His boldest move has been a bombing campaign in Yemen, where the Saudis and Iran are on opposite sides of that country's war. Here are several other places where the Saudi-Iranian friction is likely to play out: Syria's Cease-Fire Talks: This may be the most immediate casualty, with the already slim chances for a truce in Syria now facing even longer odds, according to Ali Ansari, a history professor specializing in Iran at the University of St Andrews in Scotland. The discussions set for Jan. 25 in Geneva are now likely to be "delayed, if not shelved," he said in an interview Monday. Just last month, the Saudi and Iranian foreign ministers both took part in high-level talks in New York on the Syrian war, and U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry hailed it as an important step. But Iran and Saudi are on opposite sides in the Syrian war, one of their main battlegrounds, and will be less inclined to compromise in the current atmosphere. For Persian Iran, Syrian President Bashar Assad is their most important Arab ally, and they have propped him up since the uprising against him began nearly five years ago. Assad is an Alawite, which is an offshoot of Shiite Islam. The Saudis, in turn, believe their fellow Sunnis, who make up the majority in Syria, should run the country. The Saudis are part of the U.S.-led coalition and have supported opposition factions in Syria throughout the war.
With each passing day, the United States and Iran draw each other deeper into conflict. So far, they have stopped short of war. But the likelihood of an armed conflict increases with every additional provocation, whether it is an attack on a civilian tanker ship or another round of sanctions. Both countries, with their all-or-nothing strategies, are to blame. President Donald Trump’s administration has pursued a “maximum pressure” campaign against Iran built on suffocating economic sanctions and a de facto oil and gas embargo. Iran has pursued a maximum resistance strategy, escalating into attacks on shipping lanes, downing a U.S. drone over the Persian Gulf, and rejecting out of hand all opportunities for de-escalatory talks with Washington. With both states unwilling to back down, the march toward war continues. A DEEPER SOURCE OF CONFLICT That relations could have deteriorated to this degree is remarkable. Only four years ago, Washington and Tehran signed a historic multilateral agreement that curtailed Iran’s nuclear enrichment program in exchange for U.S. sanctions relief. The deal didn’t end the mistrust between the two countries, nor did it solve long-standing disagreements about Iran’s foreign policy in the Middle East, but it created a much-needed mechanism for diplomatic engagement, which the deal’s proponents saw as necessary to avoid a war. Trump was an outspoken critic of the deal on the campaign trail, and upon taking office, he began to ratchet up pressure on Tehran. For all its faults, the Trump administration at least seemed to grasp a crucial fact: although Iran’s nuclear program had become a focal point of U.S.-Iranian tensions, it was never the real source of acrimony between the two countries. The roots of those tensions lay deeper—in Iran’s support for militant groups at war with Israel, such as Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and Hezbollah in Lebanon, and in its ties to enemies of the United States’ Gulf allies, such as the Houthis in Yemen. No less consequential was Iran’s support for Iraqi militias that killed hundreds of U.S. military personnel at the height of the Iraq war and that continue to threaten U.S. troops there. Hoping to induce a change in the Islamic Republic’s behavior, Trump withdrew from the deal in 2018 and embarked on a sanctions-based “maximum pressure” campaign. His administration presented Tehran with a list of 12 demands, most of which concerned Iran’s regional activities, with the remainder relating to the country’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs. Taken together, Trump’s conditions essentially asked Iran to abandon its grand strategy and surrender its most valuable military deterrents. In exchange, the United States promised not only to lift sanctions on Iran but also to help restore its economy and normalize diplomatic relations. The Islamic Republic, unsurprisingly, rejected the demands outright. Tehran then looked to Europe, Russia, and China, hoping that some or all of these actors would pressure the Trump administration to walk back its demands or else provide a means of bypassing the U.S. sanctions regime. Yet Iran had apparently neither amassed enough clout nor earned sufficient goodwill to secure foreign backing against the United States. The regime was effectively alone. THE LOGIC OF ESCALATION With U.S. sanctions beginning to take their toll, Iran needed to find a way out of this bind. It had three options: It could give in to U.S. demands or at least appease Washington by seeking dialogue. It could tough it out and hope that Trump would lose his 2020 reelection bid. Or it could push back and raise the stakes by showing it was prepared to escalate. Judging by its recent behavior, the Islamic Republic seems to have chosen the third option. Iran is widely believed to have been responsible for an attack against commercial ships in the Gulf of Oman on May 12. U.S. officials had repeatedly warned that Iran might be planning such a strike, and many observers anticipated that the incident would trigger a U.S. military response. Instead of escalating, however, the United States responded with calls for dialogue without preconditions. Trump's policies have led the United States to the brink of an elective war with Iran. Assuming that Iran was indeed behind the attack, the operation was a clear victory for Tehran. By mounting a costly but nonlethal attack on civilian shipping lanes, it had shifted U.S. policy from escalation to dialogue. Trump followed through by asking Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to deliver a letter to Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, expressing his desire for talks. But when Abe met with Khamenei in Tehran on June 13, both the letter and the offer for dialogue were summarily dismissed. That same day, two more oil tankers, including a Japanese-flagged vessel, were attacked in the Gulf of Oman. The United States again pegged Iran as the probable culprit, and this time the U.S. Navy provided surveillance video showing Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) personnel onboard a patrol craft removing a suspected limpet mine from the hull of one of the tankers before speeding off toward the Iranian port at Bandar-e-Jask. Iran had engineered an opportunity for dialogue and promptly squandered it. Even if the U.S. overture was insincere, as Iran’s leaders probably assumed, Iran never cared to test it. Appearing open to de-escalatory dialogue would have won Iran leverage with the United States and sympathy from the international community. Instead, Khamenei flippantly rejected the off-ramp he’d been offered, embarrassing the prime minister of a neutral foreign power and risking open war with the United States by attacking civilian targets in the Gulf of Oman. Such behavior is counterproductive and dangerous, but not altogether unexpected, given the tight boundaries Khamenei has imposed for how to engage with the United States: Iran’s leader has demanded a complete reversal of the Trump administration’s policy but refuses to engage in talks while sanctions are still in place. Unwilling to suffer through sanctions or seek compromise, Iran has only one remaining option: to escalate and challenge the Trump administration’s resolve. In keeping with this logic, Iran proceeded on June 20 to shoot down a U.S. Navy surveillance drone over international waters. (Iran claims the drone was over Iranian territorial waters.) The choice of an unmanned target likely signaled Tehran’s desire to escalate within limits, but its action still forced an American response. Trump reportedly ordered a series of U.S. strikes against Iranian missile and radar positions but halted the operation at the last minute. Instead, the United States claimed to have carried out limited cyberattacks targeting command-and-control nodes for Iran’s missile systems. The Trump administration also announced additional sanctions on a massive financial conglomeration controlled by Khamenei and on a host of IRGC navy commanders—and warned of possible future sanctions against Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif. Trump’s response shows that Washington has become just as boxed in as Tehran. The president’s policies have led the United States to the brink of an elective war with Iran, and his administration’s behavior—especially the threat of sanctions against Iran’s top diplomat—has undercut the sincerity of his repeated calls for talks. Sanctions seem to be the only tool the administration is comfortable with, but at this point new sanctions are almost ceremonial, since the most economically damaging ones have long ago been enacted. Even so, they make negotiations more difficult: following the latest round of sanctions, Iranian officials declared any window for diplomacy closed for good—an admittedly rich declaration given Iran’s previous refusal to engage in talks. Neither side seems to want a war, but both are steadily moving in that direction. Over the last week, the rhetoric on both sides has sunk to the level of schoolyard taunts. Iranian President Hassan Rouhani snapped that “The White House has become stricken with mental disability.” Trump, perhaps responding to some news reports that rendered Rouhani’s Persian more crudely as “retarded,” shot back with what seemed like a new U.S. redline, tweeting, “Any attack by Iran on anything American will be met with great and overwhelming force. In some areas, overwhelming will mean obliteration.” What remains are two states unwilling to compromise, unable to talk, and too proud to back down. Neither side seems to want a war, but both are steadily moving in that direction, boxed in by their own maximalist policies and intransigence. But peace will not come through attacking ships or shooting slow planes out of the sky. A lasting solution to the crisis requires compromise and an end to Iran’s destabilizing foreign policy in the region. These days, it seems less and less likely that Iran will follow this path—but it’s the one the Iranian people deserve.
Tensions between the United States and Iran are spiraling toward a military confrontation that carries a real possibility that the United States will use nuclear weapons. Iran’s assortment of asymmetrical capabilities—all constructed to be effective against the United States—nearly assures such a confrontation. The current US nuclear posture leaves the Trump administration at least open to the use of tactical nuclear weapons in conventional theaters. Some in the current administration may well think it to be in the best interest of the United States to seek a quick and decisive victory in the oil hub of the Persian Gulf—and to do so by using its nuclear arsenal. We believe there is a heightened possibility of a US-Iran war triggering a US nuclear strike for the following reasons: The sanction regime set against the Iranian economy is so brutal that it is likely to force Iran to take an action that will require a US military response. Unless the United States backs down from its present self-declared “economic warfare” against Iran, this will likely escalate to an open warfare between the two countries. In response to a White House request to draw up an Iran war plan, the Pentagon proposed sending 120,000 soldiers to the Persian Gulf. This force would augment the several thousands of troops already stationed in Iran’s vicinity. President Trump has also hinted that if need be, he will be sending “a lot more” troops. Defeating Iran through conventional military means would likely require a half million US forces and US preparedness for many casualties. The US nuclear posture review is worded in such a way that the use of tactical nuclear weapons in conventional theaters is envisaged, foreshadowing the concern that in a showdown with a menacing foe like Iran, the nuclear option is on the table. The United States could once again justify using nuclear force for the sake of a decisive victory and casualty-prevention, the logic used in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Trump’s cavalier attitude toward nuclear weapons, trigger-happy penchant, and utter disdain for Iran, show that he would likely have no moral qualm about issuing an order to launch a limited nuclear strike, especially in a US-Iran showdown, one in which the oil transit from the Gulf would be imperiled, impacting the global economy and necessitating a speedy end to such a war. If the United States were to commit a limited nuclear strike against Iran, it would minimize risks to its forces in the region, defang the Iranian military, divest the latter of preeminence in the Strait of Hormuz, and thus reassert US power in the oil hub of the Persian Gulf. Oil flowing through the Strait of Hormuz is critical to a rising China. US control over this merchant waterway would grant the United States significant leverage in negotiations. A limited US nuclear strike could cause a ‘regime change’ among Iranian leadership, representing a strategic setback for Russia, in light of their recent foray in the Middle East with Iranian backing. Undoubtedly, there are several significant negative consequences to a US use of nuclear weapons, opening the way for other nuclear-armed states to emulate US behavior, and for many other non-nuclear weapons states to seek their own nuclear deterrent shields. There would also be a huge outcry in the international community causing the US global image to suffer. Will such anticipated consequences represent sufficient obstacles to prevent a limited U.S. nuclear strike on Iran? With President Trump, who counts on “bomb Iran” billionaire Sheldon Adelson as one of his main campaign contributors, the threshold for using nukes certainly seems to have been lowered. How the United States and Iran came to the brink. President Donald Trump complicates the situation by stating that the United States is not seeking war with Iran, while repeatedly threatening to annihilate it. In July of 2018, in response to a statement by Iran’s President Hassan Rouhani, Trump tweeted “NEVER, EVER THREATEN THE UNITED STATES AGAIN OR YOU WILL SUFFER CONSEQUENCES THE LIKES OF WHICH FEW THROUGHOUT HISTORY HAVE EVER SUFFERED BEFORE.” On May 19, 2019, Trump fired another incendiary volley, threatening the “official end” of Iran in a U.S.-Iran war. Then Friday June 21, 2019 the day after Iran shot down a US military drone, the President said “I’m not looking for war and if there is, it’ll be obliteration like you have never seen before. But I am not looking to do that. But, you (Iran) can’t have nuclear weapons.” In an interview with NBC’s Chuck Todd. Citing Iran’s military threat, the Trump administration continues to enforce relentless economic sanctions under the guise of a “maximum pressure” strategy, designating Iran’s revolutionary guard a terrorist organization. The administration also is ramping up the US military presence in the Persian Gulf, sending several warships, a Patriot missile battery, an expeditionary force of marines, and nuclear-capable B-52 strategic bombers to the region. The United States has also withdrawn all “non-emergency” personnel in Baghdad and Erbil. These actions add fuel to the growing fear of war—a war sure to involve Iraq, home to both US military bases and powerful battle-hardened pro-Iran Shiite militias.
The great achievement of American foreign policy in the last third of the twentieth century was to establish more cooperative and productive relationships with the two largest communist states than either had with the other. Henry Kissinger famously called this “triangular diplomacy.” The United States drove a wedge between the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China by cultivating the leaders of each society and offering arms control and trade agreements that tied Moscow and Beijing directly to Washington. As both communist governments reformed, the United States was poised to encourage openness and benefit from it. Détente increased Washington’s global leverage, it weakened communist bonds, and it contributed to the end of the Cold War on largely American terms. After the Cold War, the United States continued to pursue similar policies, appealing directly to Russian and Chinese leaders for productive bilateral relations. Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush met frequently with their counterparts in Moscow and Beijing. They worked bilaterally to counter terrorist organisations, especially militant Islamist groups in Southeast and Central Asia. They helped incorporate both societies into the World Trade Organization. Washington emphasised economic cooperation, as it shifted military resources to the Middle East. Russian and Chinese leaders always maintained a mix of suspicion and resentment toward American policies that affirmed Washington’s dominance, and their subordination. By 2008 both Moscow and Beijing were openly challenging American power in Eastern Europe and the South China Sea. Russian President Vladimir Putin used military and cyber-weapons in Georgia, Ukraine, and Syria to push back against US influence. Chinese leaders Hu Jintao and especially Xi Jinping expanded China’s military presence throughout Asia and its economic resources across the globe. Through initiatives like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and “One Belt, One Road,” China is competing to supplant American economic dominance in multiple regions. More than anything, challenging American power has brought Russia and China together in their strategic outlook. The relationship is unequal and unstable, but the leaders of Moscow and Beijing share a common interest in weakening the United States, resisting the spread of democratic values, and exploiting the global capitalist system. They also see mutual benefits in undermining the current international order, largely built by the United States. Their interest in selective disorder makes Russia and China, in American eyes, “revisionist” powers. The Trump administration is not the first to observe Sino-Russian revisionism, but it is the first to take an unequivocal hard line. Since early 2017, the United States has sequentially abandoned many of the most important bilateral agreements with Russia and China on arms control and trade. Washington has simultaneously increased direct pressures on both regimes through punishing economic sanctions, steep trade tariffs, and a massive military build-up. President Trump has made warm personal appeals to Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping, but the weight of US policy has clearly fallen on the side of increased coercive pressures against Russia and China. In the case of China, Trump has also adopted more combative rhetoric. Although the president is notoriously silent about Putin, members of Congress and other parts of the American government have increased their criticisms of Russian military and cyber-aggression. US bilateral relations with Russia and China have become more belligerent than at any time since the end of the Cold War. The Trump Administration’s National Security Strategy (NSS) responds to Sino-Russian revisionism with maximum pressure. Published in December 2017, the NSS advocates “a position of strength, foremost by ensuring our military power is second to none and fully integrated with our allies and all of our instruments of power.” The American strategy document itemises joint Russian and Chinese aggression around the globe, treating the two countries as virtual twin adversaries on numerous occasions. The NSS repeats a critique of “Chinese and Russian” aggression eight times. It uses the word “strength” seventy times (in just 55 pages) to define how the United States will reverse Moscow and Beijing’s advances. Strength in this strategy is primarily military force, backed by dollars.1 President Trump does not want a war with either Russia and China, and he feels a strange affinity with their authoritarian leaders. His goal is to make a “deal” that will cement American global dominance and feed his insatiable ego. He offers his counterparts personal flattery, but he relies primarily on bullying from the barrel of a gun. Spending more than $700 billion on the US military, Trump intends to intimidate Moscow and Beijing by showing them that he has the capabilities and the will to push them back in all areas. If they want to make gains, they will have to make concessions to him. If they want stability and wealth, they will have to accept his dominance. This is an unabashed “America First” policy, designed to preserve peace by cowering potential challenges. Trump seeks to coerce and attract his powerful adversaries at the same time. He hopes to make them “love” him through fear and admiration. Trump’s strategy for Russia and China is the same as his strategy for combating enemies at home: raw power and unceasing pressure. America First strategy quickly becomes America Alone. Unlike his Cold War predecessors, Trump is pursuing his policies of pressure on adversaries without coordination among allies. If anything, he is as combative with allies – whom he views as “weaklings,” especially in Western Europe, Japan, and South Korea – as he is with enemies. Trump is making America a solo bully, applying unilateral pressures that elicit sympathy from others for his targets. Russia and China have acquired more foreign support, not less, since Trump began his pressure policy. He overestimates what the United States can accomplish alone, and he underestimates what other states can accomplish when they revolt together against him. We can expect more American belligerence toward Russia and China in the coming months, as the Mueller investigation of Russian interference in US elections continues and the US-China trade war escalates. We can expect Russia, China, and other countries to coordinate more effectively in reaction to the United States. And we can expect that soon after 2020 American leaders will realise the true lesson from the Cold War: pressure alone is counterproductive when separated from substantive efforts at collaboration with the regimes in Moscow and Beijing. The United States must return to a policy of separating Moscow and Beijing, not pushing them closer together.
On June 21, a new law on national security passed by Ukraine’s lawmakers was welcomed as a strong step on the country’s path to Euro-Atlantic integration and eventual membership of the Nato alliance. President Petro Poroshenko said the legislation would improve military-technical cooperation between Ukraine and Nato and reaffirms the country’s strategic pivot to the West. His government now plans to include the law in Ukraine’s constitution. “The idea of Ukraine joining Nato has a very strong base of popular and political support,” said Ukrainian member of parliament Svitlana Zalishchuk. “Because of our country’s security challenges, joining this alliance is even more popular than the idea of EU membership right now. For the first time we see president, prime minister and a majority in parliament all agreeing that it’s the right path.” But as politicians and the public reaffirm their commitment to membership of the transatlantic alliance, some observers see a challenge on the horizon: Ukraine has also become an important strategic partner for China. Since the outbreak of war with Russian-backed separatists in eastern Donbas in 2014, Kiev has sought to build strong ties with both the West and Beijing. At the same time, the alliance between China and Russia has grown much stronger too. High-level meetings between Russian and Chinese leaders this year have seen ties between the two countries reach new heights: a formal military alliance, pledges to improve cooperation on the international stage and at least US$1 billion in new, joint investments abroad. On June 8, Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping issued a statement saying they would together face the challenges of an increasingly unstable and uncertain world, deepening their cooperation on issues of “strategic stability”. Some analysts feel China is acting out of self-interest in Ukraine but also serving – intentionally or not – as a proxy for Russia’s agenda. “China has a very aggressive economic strategy in Europe,” said Jack Keane, a retired US army general and chairman of the Institute for the Study of War, in a recent interview with US think tank Atlantic Council. “What will follow is geopolitical influence to move Ukraine away from the West.” Ukraine currently finds itself tangled at the centre of a complicated geopolitical web, with the United States, the European Union, China and Russia all trying to pull the country in their direction. With Russia sidelined, China takes the lead in pushing deep into Ukraine, investing billions into infrastructure, agriculture and energy. But Ukrainian aerospace and weapons technology has also grabbed Beijing’s attention and state- owned companies have been making moves. China increasingly looks to Ukraine to help its armed forces become self-sufficient in the production of military hardware. Beijing Skyrizon Aviation is currently trying to buy a controlling stake in Ukrainian company Motor Sich, one of the world's largest manufacturers of engines for military aircraft. Another company aims to buy two Antonov An-225 Mriyas – the world’s largest cargo planes – but build them in China. On June 20, as parliament debated the new Law on National Security, Hanna Hopko – head of Ukraine’s Committee on Foreign Affairs – highlighted growing concerns over Beijing’s move into Ukraine’s aerospace industry. She said it was damaging to Ukraine and its Nato allies. “It’s extraordinary that we would allow a strategic partner of Moscow to acquire such sensitive and unique technology,” she said. “It strikes not only at the security of Ukraine but also our key partners and allies around the world, particularly in Asia.” But on June 25, the Ukrainian government signed another law that will result in a sharp increase in the import and export of arms. Previously permitted only for state-owned companies, relaxation of the regulations means that private firms can now cash in on the Chinese export market too. While most Nato countries have a moratorium on the sale of weapons and weapon technology to China, it has become Ukraine’s biggest market with US$100 million in annual sales. Ukrainian parts can already be found in Chinese military hardware from fighter jets and long-range missiles and aircraft carriers. It is a headache for Ukraine’s Nato allies who would prefer that Kiev didn’t arm the PLA. But the manufacturers, under severe financial strain, say they are acting out of economic necessity. “In the case of Motor Sich, company bosses there say that they’re doing what they need to do in order to protect Ukrainian jobs,” said the EU’s Ambassador to Ukraine Hugues Mingarelli. As part of their attempted takeover of the aerospace company – currently frozen by Ukrainian courts – Chinese investors had pledged to invest US$250 million into Ukrainian factories. According to Vasyl Filipchuk, a Ukrainian diplomat and head of the International Centre for Policy Studies, China is acting in its own self-interest. He said Ukraine should be open to any and all foreign investment, but be stronger and focused on the national interest. “To see Motor Sich taken over or Mryia aircraft being built in China would be a shame,” he said. “But this would be a sign of Ukrainian weakness and our corruption as opposed to Chinese aggression.” Svitlana Zalishchuk, Ukrainian MP, said China and Russia – no matter their motives – will not distract Ukraine from its Euro-Atlantic aspirations. “We have a complicated relationship with China and we see the strategic partnership they have with Russia,” she said. “But the path that Ukrainian people have chosen and that we’re focused on, is moving closer to Europe and Nato.”
Regional strategic interests are likewise driving greater Russian security cooperation with China. These include North Korea, where both seek to maintain a relatively friendly regime and forestall the possibility of a unified ROK under American influence, the Arctic, where Russia seeks to utilize Chinese economic capacity, and Mongolia, where the cooperation has ensured border stability (Lukin 2018; Hsiung and Røseth 2019; Radchenko 2018). Additionally, shared security interests from the Middle East to Venezuela have driven Russia towards China (Bekkevold 2019a). Ultimately, though, it is a broader strategic motive that is the dominant driver of Russian policy. Russian perception of threat from the United States its allies is the most significant force driving greater security ties with China. The souring of ties between the West and Russia, 8 particularly after the Ukraine crisis, is well documented (Bolt and Cross 2018). Russia views American primacy, NATO, and the liberal order as direct threats to its security, its strategic flexibility, and its sphere of influence (Blank 2018b). Internally, it is threatened by the prospect of Western subversion and democracy promotion, which it views as a cover for regime change (Kuchins 2015). China, which similarly feels threatened by American dominance is a natural partner for Russia (Yu 2019). When less threated by the West, Russia has felt less impetus to align or balance with China, while in periods of heightened tensions Russia has pursued greater security cooperation with China. A Dynamic View The relative importance of the above forces in determining the future of Russian security alignment with China depends on how static each is. The three primary obstacles to cooperation that I outline have not changed significantly over the past two decades and are unlikely to do so in the future. Russia will continue to value its great power status and identity, and while regional competition may lessen or intensify somewhat, it is likely to be small in scope. Likewise, although to a lesser extent, two drivers of greater cooperation will not significantly alter the relationship in the future. Military-industrial interests in closer ties with China will likely continue despite increasing Chinese self-reliance, as China has become an essential source of electronics and other parts; and the entrenched governing philosophies and bureaucracies of Putin and Xi will likely ensure similar leadership in the near future. We are then left with the threat of the West. Russian perception of Western threat is the most dynamic and consequently most important force in explaining changes in policy towards China, such as its recent shift from 9 engagement to strategic partnership, or future developments in the relationship. Simply put, greater Russian perception of threat from the West will likely induce it to seek closer security cooperation with China, in the form of entente or ultimately alliance. A status quo or improvement in Russian relations with and perceptions of the West will not push Russia closer to China and the Russo-Chinese security relationship will remain limited to strategic partnership or will atrophy. This finding, of course, has important policy implications for the United States and the West. Policy Responses and Conclusions Western restraint towards Russia will best forestall Russian pursuit of closer security ties with China. Given that further Russian alignment with China depends on perceived threats from the West, limiting actions that lead to such perceptions is advisable. Such restraint is not retrenchment—rather, America and its allies should for example avoid further expansion of NATO, avoid aggressive support of democracy promotion in Russia’s neighborhood, and refrain from further escalating defense postures in East Central Europe. Bringing in new NATO members in the Balkans, an action that Russia has made clear represents a threat to its interests, is an excellent example; likewise, funding of democracy promotion groups within Russia feeds into fears of regime change and should be curtailed. Apart from restraint, the United States should seek to build a constructive strategic relationship with Russia through shared partners such as India and Vietnam. These states remain important security partners for Russia and are growing in importance to America’s grand strategy towards China
Military cooperation between China and Russia has been strengthened particularly after the resolution of the borders dispute in 2001 and overcoming the accusation Russia has made against China in 2003 that was attempting to replicate its arsenal technology. Since then “the two have held high-level discussions on international security, negotiated important security-related agreements, conducted joint military exercises, and perhaps most strikingly engaged in large-scale arms trade” (Scharwtz 2014, 1). “The evolution of the China-Russia military relationship toward a higher level of cooperation and coordination is evident in the three main areas of bilateral defense engagement: (1) military exercises, (2) military-technical cooperation, and (3) high-level military-to-military contacts” (Meick 2017, 5). Arms sales is an important element of the Sino-Russian strategic partnership with China being the largest importer of Russian military equipment during 1999 to 2006 reaching nearly 2 billion USD per year from 1999-2005 (Weezerman 2017). Another important aspect that the two countries seem to strengthen their partnership is on joint military exercises ,which the use “to demonstrate their increasing military capabilities and the strength of China-Russia defense ties to the international community, particularly the United States and countries in the Asia Pacific” (Meick 2017, 6). <SIPRI Table omitted> According to the data provided the bilateral trade between the two countries seems to vary according to periods. The highest volume of which was employed in the first period of 2000 till 2004 with the next two periods present a negative relation with lower transactions that seems to balance again in the period between 2012 to 2017 but not reaching the level of the first period. Despite of enhanced cooperation since 2000, the data don’t depict an intensified cooperation but quite the opposite. The period of 2008 till 2012 includes the economic crisis which resulted in a reduction in arms sales transactions, the war in Georgia and the Syrian war that didn’t seem to increase the bilateral transactions. The last period between 2014 concedes with the annexation of Crimea, Ukraine crisis and the trade war between China and USA however despite these opportunities to forge a closer partnership or intensify their cooperation we identify a cooperative but not convergent trend (see table 1). Russia’s sales to China have decreased considerably, to less than US$ 1 billion per year (SIPRI, Weezerman, 2017, Arms Transfers Database 1991–2011).
However, there is a new dimension to the power equation with the arrival of a large Chinese presence. China has increased its involvement in Ukraine, using development assistance through its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) as a rationale for its efforts. China’s main goal is economic benefits for itself and as a foil for the brake on Russian aggression which would threaten the BRI. China is strengthening its position in Eastern Europe to gain an advantage in its relations with Russia, the EU and the U.S. For China, Ukraine is an important BRI partner. For Ukraine, China is its main Asian economic partner. In 2011, the countries signed a strategic partnership. By January 2015, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Chinese leader Xi Jinping discussed increasing cooperation during the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. In September 2017, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Pawlo Klimkin, paid a visit to China, and then last December, Ma Kai, China’s vice premier, visited Kyiv. China’s activities in Ukraine are ideal for its BRI mostly because of Ukraine’s transit-state position and its free-trade agreement with the EU. One of the main elements of BRI is establishing new railway connections between China and Europe. In 2016, Ukraine launched a test of a new rail-ferry line transporting goods between the Black and Caspian seas, but using other connections that exclude Russian territory. [xi] Chinese investment has proved to be much less onerous than the strict rules of the EU and the Bretton Woods agencies which insist on managing “Ukrainian corruption”. China aggressively competes with Ukraine’s Western partners for a strong foothold in this important frontier economy, often with much less restrictions. Combined with free trade agreements with the EU and Canada (the EU has become Ukraine’s largest bilateral trading partner at 30 billion euros [$35 billion] per year), along with steady U.S. trade, Ukraine remains a highly attractive partner to China and Chinese companies. With Beijing having pledged at least $7 billion for major Ukrainian infrastructure projects, Chinese companies, which often come in under budget and complete large projects ahead of schedule, are now major competitors with Europe for big infrastructure projects. On the south-eastern Black Sea coast, the China Harbor Engineering company completed a $40 million dredging operation to give bigger ships access to Yuzhny port, while it’s been reported that ports in Odessa, Chornomorsk, and Izmail may also benefit. While Chinese companies tackle Ukrainian infrastructure projects such as coastal highways and roads built to withstand the burden of heavy, grain-laden trucks, others are investing in new grain silos and port elevators to help with transportation logistics. [xii] China clearly sees Ukraine as a special area of interest, both for its location and for its agricultural productivity. Along with direct access to the Danube River, the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, Ukraine also has 22,000 kilometres of interconnected railway to Europe. With bilateral trade between Ukraine and China now exceeding US$7.6 billion a year, Ukraine also supplies China with the bulk of its corn consumption. A major Chinese agricultural giant, Noble Agri, has two assets in Ukraine, a sunflower seed processing complex in Mariupol, and a grain facility and port terminal in Mykolaiv which boasts a capacity of 2.5 million tons per year and storage capacity of 125,000 tons. Ukraine is the only European country where Noble Agri has a presence, while it competes worldwide with US companies like Cargill, Monsanto, and Bunge.[xiii] At the moment there is no open conflict between China and Russia over Ukraine. However, it is clear that China does oppose any expanded military initiatives between Russia and Ukraine, especially those which may close down its ports and rail lines. China has essentially economic interests in Ukraine, interests which will disappear if hostilities break out between the two. China has grown to be a much more formidable military power than Russia. Its military history is one which demonstrates the growth in Chinese power.
The most important conflict between the Russian military and President Putin may have arisen from Putin’s policy towards China. Putin’s administration has been making every effort to engage with China, by asking for assistance to join with Russia as a consumer of its energy exports, as well as a builder of pipelines, ports and railroads. This includes growing a financial partnership. These efforts have put President Putin in direct conflict with the Russian military, which views China as a strategic enemy. For decades there has been an intense competition between the two nations in their border regions, which at times has resulted in conflict and disputes over land. After a treaty was completed in November 1997 establishing the border between the two countries, and a 2004 Complementary Agreement returning some territory to China, relations have been strained since then as there is an increasing imbalance between the two sides; militarily, economically and in terms of manpower. Russia has a very serious problem with China. There are too few Russians in the regions of Khabarovsk and Primorsky Krai to match the Chinese. Russia is being depopulated at a prodigious rate with many of those who lived in Siberia and the Russian East (Dalnevostok) moving West to the cities across the Urals. There are not enough Russians to conduct the business that will need to be done on a project as vast as the extraction of oil, the building of a pipeline and the establishment of roads, ports and infrastructure in that region. Even Russians admit that this work will be performed by Chinese labourers. Russian companies do not have the manpower, the working capital, or the inclination to perform this infrastructural work. It has not improved with the continuing depopulation of the region. The dependence on Chinese manpower has had an important effect on Russia’s purported tilt towards China. Russian politicians may think it makes sense to shift focus to co-operation with China, but the Russian military has no such compulsions. Russia’s military has voiced concerns over its naval bases in Sovetskaya Gavan and Bolshoi Kamen not far away. Officials were surprised that President Putin appears more concerned about NATO (6,000 miles away) than about China, a nation with a population of billions that shares a border a quarter of a mile away across the Amur and the Ussuri Rivers. There are concerns that Russia would not be able to prevent a Chinese decision to take back some of its lost lands in the Russian Far East. This issue has been compounded by the current Chinese military and economic expansion in the Arctic and the growth of China’s military exports to the world of products derived from Russian designs, but improved upon by the Chinese.
KIEV – Here in Ukraine, China doesn’t pressure for political or judicial reforms, nor are they much interested in voicing opinions on illegally-annexed Crimea or the simmering conflict in eastern Donbass. Instead, Beijing pursues an aggressive, business-focused agenda. In the wake of 2014’s Euromaidan Revolution, Russia’s seizure of Crimea, and the start of secessionist conflicts in Donetsk and Luhansk, Ukraine looked to Europe and North America as their new, logical allies. Those partnerships have, in many respects, grown and strengthened. But now China aggressively competes with Ukraine’s Western partners for a strong foothold in this important frontier economy. While investment and aid from Europe and North America has a price-tag, China and Chinese companies have a huge pot of money that they’re largely willing to spend without explicit conditions. A free trade agreement and visa-free regime has contributed to the European Union becoming Ukraine’s largest bilateral trading partner – 30 billion euros ($35 billion) per year, with 27 percent year-on-year increases. Canada also has an FTA with Ukraine while trade with the United States is steady. But these Western friends can, at times, also be Kiev’s biggest critics. The International Monetary Fund recently told Ukraine they could expect no further support until the country approves a robust anti-corruption court. At the same time, the European Union is withholding 600 million euros in macro-financial assistance, citing their frustration with the pace of judicial reforms in Ukraine. Prospective foreign investors from Western countries cite corruption and political instability as their biggest obstacle to bringing their business here. But against this backdrop, China steps up with billions of dollars worth of investment and low-interest loans, demanding very little in return but access to a country that is, for them, strategically vital. China Spends Big in New Ukraine Few parties are willing or able to compete with Beijing’s spending power in Ukraine. In this fledgling free-market economy, Chinese companies now compete with European rivals on tenders for big infrastructure projects. Their ability to come in under budget and complete large projects ahead of schedule means that, more often than not, they’re winning the big contracts. While Beijing had pledged at least $7 billion for major Ukrainian infrastructure projects, Chinese companies have already been making their move. On the southeastern Black Sea coast, the China Harbor Engineering company just completed a $40 million dredging operation to give bigger ships access to Yuzhny port. It’s predicted that other important ports in Odessa, Chornomorsk, and Izmail will receive similar Chinese attention. “We can expect more such projects to be undertaken by the Chinese,” said infrastructure minister Volodymry Omelyan in a recent interview. “They’ve become very interested in Ukraine.” “I hope that other Chinese companies will follow this example and enter the Ukrainian market,” Chinese ambassador to Ukraine, Du Wei, said at a high-level meeting in Kiev last summer. And following the example they are. From the Black Sea to Kiev, Chinese companies are staking their claim and planting their flags. One Chinese company will soon break ground on a 200 kilometer cement coastal highway, built to withstand the burden of heavy, grain-laden trucks. Another company is investing in new grain silos and port elevators to help with quicker transportation as another plans to build a popular new ring road around Kiev. Also in the capital, the China Pacific Construction Group recently signed a $2 billion deal with Kiev Mayor Vitaliy Klitschko to construct a fourth metro line – a Chinese bank will cover 85 percent of the cost with loans. Beyond infrastructure, China is purchasing more shares in the new Ukraine. Later this year, the China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation will start financing a new state-backed mortgage scheme with a $500 million loan, meaning that a Chinese company will have a stake in Ukrainian home ownership. Other companies are targeting the country’s energy sector, with one firm planning to build a 500 MW wind farm, the largest in eastern Europe Some observers have suggested that Beijing’s growing influence and interests in Ukraine don’t exactly run parallel with Ukraine’s ambitions for European integration and eventual membership of NATO. But in Kiev’s corridors of power, the response to this concern is clear: Ukraine needs the money and China is willing to spend. “We aren’t actively targeting China for foreign direct investment,” says one top economic advisor to Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman. “We’re prioritizing Germany, France, and the United Kingdom. But if China wants to come here and improve our ports and railways and build our roads, why would we stop them?” At the moment, Chinese self-interest is highly compatible with Ukraine’s state-building objectives and political leaders here are doing everything they can to improve bilateral ties with the Asian giant. According to Prime Minister Groysman, China is a “strategic partner” and “strategic priority” for Ukraine. “We’re ready to stimulate and deepen the cooperation,” he said at a recent meeting with Chinese Vice Premier Ma Kai.
China’s Door to Europe The question as to why China has become so interested and heavily invested in a country 6,500 kilometers from Beijing is easily answered. “China’s growing interest in Ukraine makes sense,” says British-Ukrainian historian Bohdan Nahaylo. “The country has resources, a highly skilled but low-cost labor force and, geographically, it’s very strategically located.” Access to the Black Sea, Sea of Azov, and the Danube river have grabbed Beijing’s attention as they plan the maritime aspect of their Belt and Road trade and transportation initiative to more easily transport Chinese goods around the world. Ukraine’s position as a transport corridor linking east and west with 170,000 kilometers of road and 22,000 kilometers of interconnected railway – although much is in need of repairs – represents a chance to dramatically decrease transport times for trillions of dollars worth of Chinese goods headed west. The new free trade agreement with the European Union makes it a perfect and logical transport corridor to the world’s wealthiest consumer market. But hungry China also needs access to the world’s farms and Ukraine’s growing agriculture sector will soon have the capacity to feed 800 million people, according to experts. This year, Ukraine has already overtaken the United States as China’s biggest corn supplier as total bilateral trade passes $7.6 billion. While Beijing’s strong movements into Ukraine are significant, the broader picture is one of China’s deep push into Europe, investing heavily in every country from Bulgaria to Norway. In the last 10 years, experts say that Chinese companies have invested at least $318 billion into Europe, representing a relentless advance on the continent. While some European politicians have raised red flags and leaders like Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron have said Europe needs a common strategy to manage this, for Ukraine it’s a question of economic necessity. If the Chinese money keeps flowing, politicians and project managers here in Ukraine will happily find a way to spend it.
With Venezuela in flames, China and Russia are seeking claims in the rubble. But the United States has been caught flat-footed, and the Pentagon is struggling to develop ways to blunt the countries’ influence in Latin America since President Trump has antagonized and distanced himself from nations in the Western Hemisphere. Defense officials have sought non-force options to deter China and Russia in Venezuela, CNN reported this week, through a mix of humanitarian missions and more training in Latin America led by U.S. Southern Command, the Pentagon arm that oversees a sixth of the world’s land mass. Yet experts said those efforts and others are in opposition to pressure and rhetoric from the White House, which has made significant demands to Latin American nations to curb migration and drug trafficking without offering much in return — all while ceding influence and support that Russia, and particularly China, have been happy to take over. “The Trump administration’s policy has supercharged China’s increased presence in the region,” said Benjamin Gedan, former National Security Council official under the Obama administration and a senior adviser to the Latin American program at the Wilson Center, a Washington think tank. “It’s entirely counterproductive.” For years, China and Russia have sought more influence in the Western Hemisphere, but are increasingly emboldened to bolster their economic and security positions in South America, Central America and the Caribbean. China has pledged to invest $250 billion there and reach half a trillion dollars in trade, while Russia has taken root to antagonize the United States and demonstrate its might. Both have invested billions in Venezuela, though some experts have questioned Russia’s true prominence and focus on the region.
Meanwhile, the Trump administration’s approach to Latin America is a house of mirrors and contradictions as it emphasizes relations mainly through migration and crime. Citing a crush of immigrants at the border, Trump plans to slash aid for Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala, where assistance is aimed at combating corruption, stimulating economics and reducing violence — the issues that have driven migration to the United States. Administration officials have said they do not think the aid has been effective. Trump has also leveled sanctions on Cuba and Nicaragua for their support of the embattled Maduro government in Venezuela, recalled a trio of diplomats after Central American nations no longer recognized Taiwan, imposed steel tariffs harmful to Brazil and told a former Mexican president he would consider sending U.S. troops over the border of its neighbor and ally to battle cartels. [Trump administration announces new measures against Cuba] Those and other measures have angered Latin American officials and have led some to reassess the worth of a U.S. relationship. “There is harsh rhetoric coming from the White House but not a lot offered by way of replacement,” said Cynthia Arnson, the director of the Wilson Center’s Latin American program. “The reaction has been: The U.S. treats us as the enemy, in economic terms.” Other parts of the administration have scrambled to assert the United States as the favored power in the region. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has toured the hemisphere and criticized China and Russia for what he has described as strengthening authoritarian leaders and spreading corruption. “On this continent, the United States is showing up as never before — reminding our friends of how much we have in common, of how much our interests align, and how much we love you,” Pompeo said April 12 in Lima. Pompeo added: “China, Russia — they’re showing up at the doorstep, but once they enter the house, we know the debt traps. They will use debt traps, they will disregard rules, and they will spread disorder in your home.” A senior administration official blamed the Obama administration for “neglect” in the region and said Trump has worked to amass a coalition to support a democratic transition for Venezuela. U.S. Southern Command did not return a request for comment. While the administrations works to curb China and Russia incursions, those nations are already there, and China particularly has marbled South America with military hardware, technology and direct military relationships that have signaled deeper interest. That has prompted some concern on the continent, most recently over a $50 million, Chinese military-built satellite control center that towers over the Patagonian steppe, triggering speculation it may also double as a surveillance station. [Hundreds of immigrant recruits risk ‘death sentence’ after Army bungles data, lawmaker says] China has sold aircraft, weapons and military equipment in Venezuela, Peru, Ecuador and other nations to burrow itself in local infrastructure and political decisions. It has also ramped up military exercises and humanitarian missions, and in distributing arms and technology, it has created an environment where it can fine-tune its equipment and distribution networks. “China is trying to rewire the world,” said R. Evan Ellis, a research professor of Latin American studies at the U.S. Army War College. It is the same playbook that Southern Command has used for years, he said. China’s recent influence is even more stark when compared to that of Russia, Ellis said. Russian proliferation of arms and military hardware, most notably in Venezuela, has declined as nations look to China for more reliable systems. And Chinese mobilizations and invitations for young Latin American officers to train in China demonstrates a seriousness that Russia has not often shown. Russian deployments of warplanes and vessels to Cuba and Venezuela for years have pointed more to provocation than strategy, but Russia has far less to lose in the region, Ellis said.
U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. David Goldfein, returning from a trip to Colombia, said over the weekend that the Trump administration is making a push to strengthen alliances across Latin America as part of an effort to counter rising Chinese and Russian influence in the United States’ backyard. In an interview with Foreign Policy, Goldfein said Colombia and other Latin American countries risked being locked out of U.S. and allied operations if they stopped buying military hardware from the United States and turned to other markets instead. A 1963 U.S. intelligence assessment underscores how many countries—even Sweden—were exploring nuclear weapons programs… “While there may be other cheap hardware out there that might be available on the market, at some point it becomes really hard to make it connect and share within the system,” Goldfein said by phone Saturday while flying home from Colombia. His trip was part of a broader administration effort to reinforce alliances across Latin America as the region grapples with a range of security threats, from narcotrafficking and terrorism to Venezuela’s economic collapse and ensuing refugee crisis. During the two-day visit, which followed U.S. Defense Secretary James Mattis’s own South America tour in August, Goldfein met with Colombia’s minister of defense, commander general, and air force chief, and he spoke with students at the Colombian war college. “When it comes to China and Russia, we are looking at cooperation where we can and pushing back aggressively where we must,” Goldfein said. “We keep a close eye on their activities globally, but certainly we keep an eye on their activities [in Latin America].” Underlying the outreach effort, experts say, is U.S. recognition that China and Russia are quietly exerting economic and military influence in Latin America. China is a master at leveraging trade and direct economic investment for geopolitical gains, they say. Driven by a desire to tap into Latin America’s vast oil reserves, as well as to bolster anti-American sentiment, China has invested large sums of money in the region. It has surpassed the United States as the main destination for exports in seven countries in the region. In five of those countries—Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Peru, and Uruguay—China is now the largest export market. It has also been working with Argentina on a space station in Patagonia. “The Colombians are concerned that the U.S. has been leaving the region behind, and it has created a void, this vacuum to fill,” said Moises Rendon, an analyst with the Center for Strategic and International Studies. He noted Colombia’s dilemma: It “can’t say no to China, because they are providing opportunities and investment, [while] the U.S. is not providing the same types of opportunities.”
Russia, meanwhile, is seen as less of a power player in the region but has sold billions of dollars of weapons to countries across Latin America. Unlike China, which wants to use Latin America’s natural resources for its own economic growth, Russia’s interest in the region is primarily strategic, Rendon said. Both nations are using these commercial ties to support Latin American regimes that violate human rights and are antagonistic to the United States, particularly Venezuela, Nicaragua, and Bolivia, with the end goal of undermining America’s influence in the region, analysts said. “One very important concern for the U.S. government is that the Chinese are propping up [Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro’s] regime and other nondemocratic leaders like Nicaragua [and] Bolivia,” Rendon said. The escalation of Chinese influence in Latin America is reflected in the number of nations that have swapped recognition from Taiwan to China, according to Ana Quintana, an analyst with the Heritage Foundation. This group now includes El Salvador, Costa Rica, Panama, and the Dominican Republic. The goal is not just “sticking it to the Americans,” but also “amplifying their power,” Quintana said, noting the region’s wealth of oil reserves. Both China and Russia “want to be in a position to be a power broker in Latin America.” The U.S. administration’s approach to countering Chinese and Russian influence in Latin America is rooted in building new alliances and strengthening the ones that already exist. Maintaining strong military-to-military ties is key, Goldfein said. “There are times when our diplomatic relationships may change based on the political environment, but we are able to maintain a military-to-military relationship and dialogue,” Goldfein said. He stressed his close friendship with Colombia’s Air Force chief, Gen. Carlos Eduardo Bueno, and lauded the country for leading the region in promoting democracy. “Colombia is really the gold standard for how you take the resources of the country and, through strong leadership and perseverance, you turn a country around and get it on a path toward democracy,” Goldfein said. Ensuring U.S. and Colombian forces can operate seamlessly together involves not just frequent joint exercises, he said, but also using interoperable equipment. For example, the Colombian Air Force is a world leader in employing light attack aircraft to fight drug traffickers, a practice the U.S. Air Force is hoping to emulate against insurgents in the Middle East. The United States has in recent years provided A-29 Super Tucanos, the same aircraft the Colombian Air Force operates, to the fledgling Afghan Air Force, and it is now looking to buy that platform for its own pilots. During the visit, Goldfein said, he and Colombian leaders discussed partnership opportunities “to protect the sovereignty of their airspace,” including potentially selling Colombia U.S. military aircraft such as F-16 fighter jets. Reinforcing U.S. alliances in Latin America is also part of a “layered defense approach” to protecting America’s borders, Goldfein said. One current concern is the crisis of Venezuelan migrants, who are pouring into Colombia at rates of more than 4,000 a day. At the request of the Colombian government, Mattis this fall sent the U.S. Navy’s hospital ship USNS Comfort to Colombia to provide medical care for the migrants. Another challenge the two air chiefs discussed is a recent spike in cocaine production across Colombia. Goldfein said the United States is exploring how it can help the Colombian government eradicate the coca fields. “We need to be there for our Latin American counterparts for the good and the bad,” Quintana said. “This is a very critical time, because there is a lot of positives happening in the region.”
On Ukraine’s Black Sea coast, the most active foreign actor is not Russia. It’s China. On the Danube, Chinese investors are mulling buying a Ukrainian river shipping company that could insert Chinese products deep into Eastern Europe. At the two big ports flanking Odesa, China Harbor Engineering Company just finished dredging Yuzhny and now is bidding to dredge Chornomorsk and to build a rail-to-ferry terminal. On land, one Chinese company starts work shortly on a 200-kilometer cement coastal highway, built to take the pounding of overladen grain trucks. At Mykolaiv, another Chinese company has built modern grain silos and port elevators. Further east, Chinese companies study dredging ports in Mariupol and Berdyansk. And herein lies the geopolitical rub. The two ports are on the Sea of Azov, a body of water that, after the 2014 annexation of Crimea, the Kremlin would like to turn into a Russian lake. If, as expected, a Chinese company wins the contracts, the Russians would have to watch Chinese dredgers sail under the new Russian bridge connecting Crimea with Russia’s mainland. In Ukraine, China carefully avoids public conflict with its “strategic partner,” Russia. Last month, when Ma Kai, a Chinese vice premier, visited Kyiv to review investment projects, his public statements were few and bland. Few people noticed when he announced $7 billion in Chinese investment projects for Ukraine. Quietly but determinedly, China pursues its own interests in Ukraine. Not only is a Chinese company expected to upgrade Ukraine’s two commercial ports on the Sea of Azov, but another Chinese company wants to capitalize on the wind coming off the Azov. It wants to build a 500 megawatt wind farm—right in the path of where Russia threatened to open a “land bridge” from Donetsk to Crimea. In Ukraine, Chinese self-interest means two things: guaranteeing access to Ukraine’s abundant food crops, and building a lesser route for its multi-strand Silk Road to Europe. Aiming for the world’s richest consumer market, this route would go from Kazakhstan, across the Caspian to Azerbaijan, on to Georgia, and then across the Black Sea to Chornomorsk. For Ukraine, China is a welcome investor, moving where Western companies often fear to tread. “Ukraine needs the money, China has the money,” said Radu Magdin, a political consultant visiting from Romania. “Also, Chinese investments are not values related. There are no conditionalities.”
Many of China’s projects are related to guaranteeing food exports—port modernizations, dockside silos, highways, a new bridge over the Dnipro, and an offer to build railroad locomotives in Ukraine. The dredging and deepening of Yuzhny port is part of a larger $150 million, Cargill-Ukrainian project which will increase Ukraine’s grain export capacity by 15 percent. Two projects seem designed to win friends and influence. In November, two Chinese companies signed a contract to build Kyiv’s fourth metro line, a $2 billion arcing line designed to ease crowding in the city center. Other projects under negotiation by Chinese companies are guaranteed crowd-pleasers for the political and media elite in the capital: a ring road highway and a fast light rail from central Kyiv to Boryspil, the city’s busiest airport. Some analysts fear that China eventually will form an unholy partnership with Russia, dragging Ukraine back under Russia-oriented authoritarian rule. “China has a very aggressive economic strategy in Europe,” Jack Keane, retired US Army general and chairman of the Institute for the Study of War, warned in an interview last month in Kyiv. “What will follow is geopolitical influence to move Ukraine away from the West.” In Greece, billions of dollars of Chinese investment, notably in the port of Piraeus, has led to pro-Chinese stances by Athens. But China’s rise seems to be helping China, not Russia. In Ukraine, one French banker in Kyiv argues, China may be happy to have Russia tied up in an expensive, pointless war on its Western end. This makes the Kremlin more open to Chinese demands in its east. Since 2014, Chinese investment in the Russian Far East has grown in what China wants: oil, gas, iron, and farmland. With Russia ejected from Ukraine’s investment scene, China makes its moves. Last fall, in a move to facilitate public and private investment, China’s Bohai Commodity Exchange acquired the Ukrainian Bank for Reconstruction and Development. In Ukraine, the understandable obsession with Russia is so great, that China’s recent investment push is passing largely unnoticed.
The Chinese government has already made huge allocations to OBOR through the mechanisms of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank ($100 billion) and the Silk Road Fund ($40 billion). When private investments are added, total investment could easily reach $1 trillion. The initiative is still being clarified, but it’s already obvious that many Asian and European countries are eager to be included in the Silk Road. For China, as a global power, its presence in as many countries as possible is a tool by which it can exert quiet influence (by making the countries dependent on China’s trade routes and economy). Some countries are of particular interest to China. Among them is Ukraine, where China’s interest is driven by several key factors. These factors include Ukraine’s geographic location and its potential to become a major transit hub within OBOR, in addition to the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade agreement between Ukraine and the EU, and Ukraine’s agricultural industry. First, simply by looking at the map, it is clear that Ukraine’s is strategically located along the land route from China to the EU, which a priori makes Ukraine’s territory an attractive spot for a major transit hub. Though Ukrainian infrastructure is not as well developed as that of Poland or Turkey, this is a deficit easily corrected in the medium term. Precisely because of this view, in December 2013 during the visit of Ukraine’s former President Viktor Yanukovych to China a range of agreements were signed, among them a memorandum on the construction of a new deep-sea terminal in Crimea and the reconstruction of Sevastopol sea fishing terminal. Crimea was scheduled to become a large transit hub, and China was ready to invest $13 billion. Russia’s annexation of Crimea put paid to those plans, but they could reemerge in the south of Ukraine, specifically in the Odesa and Mykolaiv oblasts, which enjoy access to the Black Sea. China is the second most important EU trading partner behind the U.S., accounting for 14 percent of total extra EU trade in 2014. The EU import of goods from China has significantly increased over the last decade, from €129.2 billion ($141.7 billion) in 2004 to €302.5 billion in 2014. Exports have more than tripled in 2004-2014, to hit €164.7 billion in 2014. This trend will continue since both the EU and China are eager to deepen their trade relations. In this context, even if just some of the goods that make their way to and from China and the EU were to pass through Ukrainian territory, Ukraine would be able to leverage its unique geographical position and become an important new cargo transit link in the Silk Road.
Second, on January 1 this year Ukraine and the EU signed the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (DCFTA). The EU is Ukraine’s largest trading partner: Over the first 9 months of 2015, 32.9 percent of all Ukrainian exports of goods went to the EU, which in turn provided 39.1 percent of Ukraine’s imports. Ukraine’s main shipments to the EU are ferrous metals, iron ore, electric machinery and cereals. It’s principal imports from the EU are machinery, transport equipment, chemicals, textile and clothing, and agricultural products. While the trade volume between Ukraine and the EU was €20.4 billion for the first nine months of 2015, it has considerable scope to increase under the DCFTA. For China, there are two elements of importance here: geographic proximity to the EU and potential for investment. Ukraine has oriented its foreign and domestic policy towards Europe. As it reforms, Ukraine will offer improved transparency, democratic accountability, and the rule of law. In playing by the rules, Ukraine will attract Chinese business hoping to invest in manufacturing for export to the EU. Ukraine’s proximity to the EU market has already been sufficient for some Chinese companies to take the plunge and do business in Ukraine, ignoring the presently unfavorable investment climate. Ukraine’s embassy in Beijing estimates that as of October 1, 2015 the volume of Chinese investment in the Ukrainian economy was $22.6 million, 31 percent in industry, 23 percent in agriculture, 15 percent in transport, and 14 percent in retail and wholesale trade. According to the CEO of Chinese Commerce Association Ruslan Osypenko, “the current level of cooperation between Ukraine and China is based on the signed in 2011 Declaration on Strategic Partnership between the two states. China is observing certain success of the reforms that are being performed by the Ukrainian government. That is why Chinese companies do not leave Ukraine and quite opposite, they decided to get united and established a Chinese Commerce Association that is a platform and a bridge for business circles of both countries.”
The fourth attraction for China is Ukraine’s agricultural sector. In 2015, Ukraine overtook the U.S. as China’s number one corn supplier. Traditionally heavily reliant on U.S. agricultural products, China is reducing this dependence with the help of Ukrainian agricultural produce. In 2012 Ukraine and China signed a $28 billion contract under which Ukraine would supply agricultural products to China in exchange for the purchase of Chinese fertilizers and agricultural equipment. In 2015 China became the largest importer of Ukrainian agricultural products. In nine months of 2015 Ukrainian exports of grain to China increased 6.6 times, according to information from Ukraine’s embassy in China. In the same year, China granted market access to 18 Ukrainian dairy producers. China’s Noble Agri, wholly owned by COFCO (China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Corporation), has two assets in Ukraine. The first is located in Mariupol. It is a sunflower seed processing complex with a daily crushing capacity of 1,500 metric tons and storage capacity of 180,000 metric tons. The second facility is a newly built Mykolaiv grain port terminal, which boasts transshipment capacity of 2.5 million tons per year and storage capacity of 125,000 tons. Ukraine is the only European country where Noble Agri has a presence, and is competing with such large US companies like Cargill, Monsanto, and Bunge. Moreover, Noble Agri sources bulk commodities from low cost regions and supplies them to high-growth demand markets, particularly in Asia and the Middle East. For instance, it is the leading supplier of corn and soybean meal in Saudi Arabia. Hence, in addition to securing agricultural products to China, the Noble Agri is also competing on the global market with other, mainly American companies. Clearly, China has a strategic interest in Ukraine. This interest is based on a long-term perspective that views Ukraine as a key link to Europe. As China pursues its grand strategy for Eurasia, Ukraine is poised to be a major beneficiary.
Today, the United States and Ukraine signed a new memorandum of understanding on Conventional Weapons Stockpile Management. Signed by Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs R. Clarke Cooper and Ukraine Ministry of Foreign Affairs Acting Director of the Directorate of International Security Ruslan Nimchynskyi, the memorandum sets out a $4 million U.S. contribution toward construction of six explosive storehouses over the next two years for the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense. This project will enhance the safety and security of Ukraine’s munitions stockpiles, as well as advance Ukraine closer to its goal of meeting NATO and international standards for physical security and stockpile management. From 2004 to 2018, the U.S. Conventional Weapons Destruction program has invested more than $40 million in support of Ukraine’s effort to address the legacy of the large quantities of conventional arms and ammunition inherited after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. In 2018, as the Lead Nation for the NATO Partnership for Peace Trust Fund, the United States funded the destruction or demilitarization of over 1,700 metric tons of obsolete Soviet-vintage munitions in Ukraine. In recent years, we have extended this partnership to save lives by providing support to clear landmines and other explosive hazards along the line of contact between the Ukrainian armed Forces and Russia-led forces in eastern Ukraine. In 2018 alone, the U.S. government funded conventional weapons destruction efforts that cleared over 227,000 square meters (56 acres) of land and returned them to local communities.
The ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine would make it difficult for Ukraine to enter NATO. The Western military alliance is often reluctant to welcome new members that are already embroiled in a conflict because a key article of the alliance's founding treaty guarantees collective defense. Nevertheless, in June 2017 the country's parliament adopted legislation that reinstated NATO membership as a strategic foreign and security policy objective. And in February, Ukraine's former President Petro Poroshenko signed a constitutional amendment committing his country to becoming a member of NATO and the European Union. Ukraine must "submit a request for EU membership and receive a NATO membership action plan no later than 2023," Poroshenko said at the time. But Poroshenko was voted out of office in the last Presidential elections in April. Before winning, current President Volodymyr Zelenskiy promised to hold a referendum on NATO membership if he won. But he also appears to be committed to Ukraine's transatlantic path, experts note. "On foreign policy, Zelenskiy has signaled significant continuity. He has reaffirmed Ukraine's goals of full integration in European and Euro-Atlantic institutions by expressing a desire to join the European Union and NATO," wrote Steven Pifer, a non-resident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. "He made his first overseas trip as president to Brussels to meet with EU and NATO leaders, is traveling to Paris and Berlin June 17-18, and will host an EU-Ukraine summit in Kyiv on July 8." During his trip to Brussels, Zelenskiy explicitly pledged that joining NATO and the EU, "is the priority of our foreign policy."
In the month since Volodymyr Zelenskyy's election as the President of Ukraine, the comedian turned politician has been accused of sexism, plagiarism and arbitrarily interpreting the constitution and laws. He has run into a fountain and invited journalists to tour the Presidential Administration, which he wants to vacate and turn into a museum. Meanwhile, on the international front, Zelenskyy continues his predecessor’s course towards integration with the European Union and NATO. Hromadske recaps the key moments of Zelenskyy’s first month in office. Zelenskyy started to change the political landscape immediately after he took the president's oath. He began the inaugural speech with a declaration that every Ukrainian is president and responsible for the country, and finished with an announcement about the dissolution of the 8th convocation of parliament. The next day, there was a mandatory consultation with the heads of different factions and a decree on the appointment of snap parliamentary elections on July 21. It was at this meeting that Zelenskyy proposed to hold parliamentary elections exclusively under the proportional representation system with closed party lists and to lower the entry barrier from five percent to three. Despite calling on the parliament to adopt the electoral code and open lists under the proportional system just the day before. However, the parliament did not support Zelenskyy’s bill on holding elections with closed lists. The election campaign began on May 24, the day after the presidential decree was published. However, 62 MPs from the People’s Front party lodged an appeal against the decree on dissolving parliament with the Constitutional Court and asked it to consider the issue within 30 days. So it was unclear whether the snap parliamentary elections would happen until June 20 when the court ruled the decrees to dissolve the parliament and hold the elections as constitutional. The main and so far most scandalous appointment by Zelenskyy has been head of his administration, Andriy Bohdan, who is associated with oligarch Ihor Kolomoisky. Under the law on the cleansing of power, he is not allowed to head the administration since he was an ombudsman working on anti-corruption policy for more than a year in Mykola Azarov’s government (2010 -2014). The deputy head of the presidential administration, a former member of the National Agency for the Prevention of Corruption, Ruslan Ryaboshapka, explained that the law on the cleansing of power did not apply to Bohdan because he was not a public servant. Deputy Minister of Justice Serhiy Petukhov took a different position. He was surprised that representatives of the presidential team were invoking the law on civil service, despite the law on cleansing power clearly stating that the head of the administration was subject to it. In the end, Ryaboshapka agreed that Zelenskyy would fire Bohdan – but only after the Constitutional Court recognized that the law on lustration was in line with the constitution. And until then, the head of state cannot apply the law, which "contradicts the principle of the rule of law and does not comply with the constitution." The Deputy Minister of Justice paid a heavy price for his stance: Zelenskyy did not send Petukhov to a conference on private international law in The Hague, where he was also supposed to lead a Ukrainian delegation. Zelenskyy surrounded himself with "his" people. Former partners of his Kvartal 95 television studio and those from his election headquarters snapped up senior positions in the Presidential Administration and became advisers to the head of state. Former head of the Better Regulation Delivery Office, Oleksiy Honcharuk, who became Bohdan’s deputy for economic issues and Ukraine’s ambassador to NATO Vadym Prystaiko, who is in charge of foreign economic affairs at the administration, are perhaps the only new faces. Zelenskyy failed to fill his quota within the government: parliament refused to dismiss Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin and Defense Minister Stepan Poltorak. They also didn’t get the votes for the resignation of the head of Ukraine’s Security Service Vasyl Hrytsak. So his administration decided to take another route. They appointed Servant of the People party founder Ivan Bakanov to the role of First Deputy Chief of Ukraine’s Security Service (SBU) and head of the Main Directorate for Combating Corruption and Organized Crime. While introducing Bakanov's appointment, Zelenskyy stated that the new SBU first deputy chief will have two weeks to "restart" the security service and deal with smuggling. Zelenskyy completely forgot about the point in his election campaign program which stated that the security service "will not deal with economic crimes." Meanwhile, the appointment of a Batkivschyna MP, Vladyslav Bukhariev, as the head of the Foreign Intelligence Service of Ukraine shows the kind of political powers the president is expecting to count on in the next parliament. Zelenskyy’s first attempt to find a common language with the parliament after signing the decree on its dissolution and snap elections failed. Bills on closed list elections (as opposed to the mixed system that is used now) and the withdrawal of procurement by the Central Election Commission from the law on public procurement were not even included in the agenda. Next came an attempt at writing a draft law on impeachment. The document details a procedure for removing the president from office, which could be greatly drawn out. Although the draft law was registered, MPs did not include it on the agenda. They however did consider and adopt a draft law on temporary investigation commissions, which provides for the impeachment procedure. The document was signed by the speaker of the parliament Andriy Parubiy. Zelenskyy can now veto the bill or sign it. Doing nothing is not an option, because the principle of tacit consent comes in and after 15 days the law is published and comes into force. Another bill from the president is on illegal enrichment. The issue emerged after a Constitutional Court ruling, which found that the relevant article of the criminal code didn’t comply with the Basic Law. In his bill, Zelenskyy proposed that criminal liability should only be imposed when the amount of illegal assets exceed 12,000 non-taxable minimum income of citizens (which at the moment of writing was more than 11.5 million hryvnia or $425,900). However, changes in the Civil Procedure Code will allow confiscating or levying so-called unjustified assets into state revenue if their value exceeds the official salary and cost of living by 500 times (960,500 hryvnia or $35,500). However, this bill was not included on the agenda, too, despite illegal enrichment being one of the conditions of cooperation between Ukraine and the IMF. Two other presidential bills on amending the law on alternative energy sources and the electricity market appeared to be aimed at papering over cracks. The first bill aimed to give households back the right to claim a ‘green tariff’ for establishing ground-based solar power plants. The second aimed to postpone the launch of the electricity market, which should de jure happen on July 1. However, in reality, nothing was ready for it anyway. Zelenskyy’s first foreign business trip was in Brussels. On June 4 and 5, he met with the NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, the President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker, the Head of the European Council Donald Tusk and the President of Poland Andrzej Duda. During the meetings, the president voiced this key message: Ukraine is still striving to become a full member of the European Union and NATO. The European press called Zelenskyy a "new president with an old course." In matters concerning foreign policy, of course. The visit was not without incidents. Zelenskyy, word for word, repeated a part of his predecessor Petro Poroshenko’s speech from the congress of the European Solidarity Party. The Presidential Administration called this a case of sabotage by Foreign Ministry employees and promised to conduct an internal investigation. Next, Zelenskyy headed to Paris. On June 17, he met with French President Emmanuel Macron. They discussed the implementation of the Minsk agreements and a possible meeting in the Normandy format. Zelenskyy also declared that Ukraine would not be negotiating directly with Russia-backed separatists. He also called on the Russian leadership to release all Ukrainian prisoners and implement the decision of the International Tribunal and release the detained Ukrainian sailors. More specifics about the negotiations in the Normandy format emerged the next day during a meeting between Zelenskyy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel. They could take place on July 12. During his visit to Germany, the president appealed to German officials and business representatives with a request not to weaken the sanctions.
Ukraine is committed to European integration, Zelensky said. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky has said Ukraine is already part of the European family, while European integration is the main aspiration of the Ukrainian people. "Ukraine is already part of the European family. Ukraine is committed to European integration as the main aspiration of our people. But we understand that we need to provide convincing results to be able to join the common economic, legal, customs and digital space of the EU," Zelensky said in an interview with the German newspaper Bild when asked whether he believes Ukraine will join the European Union. The president stressed he would like to see Ukraine at such a level of development so that EU countries would look at it as an equal member of the European Union. He promised to do everything possible to this end. Zelensky also assured Ukraine is a reliable partner for NATO, and will do everything to join the Alliance in the future.
Ukrainian society demands high European standards of life and security. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky says that the course towards full membership of the European Union and NATO remains Ukraine's unwavering foreign policy. "The strategic course of Ukraine is aimed at full membership in the EU and NATO. This is enshrined in the Constitution of Ukraine and remains our unwavering foreign policy priority," Zelensky said at a joint briefing with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg in Brussels on June 4. The Ukrainian president also emphasized that Ukraine's movement to the high European standards of life and security was a requirement of Ukrainian society. "This is the goal of all our reforms – raising the living standards of Ukrainians, eliminating corruption and modernizing the entire state. This can only be done by providing national security," he said. As UNIAN reported, the Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament, on February 7 amended the Constitution for sealing the country's strategic course state to acquire full membership of Ukraine in the European Union and NATO. On April 20, the then President Petro Poroshenko approved an action plan for the implementation of Ukraine's strategic course towards EU and NATO membership.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky emphasizes that from 2020 Ukraine should begin introducing NATO standards and procedures for the Armed Forces of Ukraine, primarily in the training of troops. “This work should not be imitation, but become real steps to reform the Ukrainian army according to the standards of the North Atlantic Alliance. At the same time, we must remember that man is the main value,” he said after hearing a report by Chief of the General Staff – Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Ruslan Khomchak on Wednesday, the presidential press service said.
Volodymir Zelensky is vowing to break the old molds—from his personal appearance and the people he’s appointing, to his hard pro-NATO stance and speaking Russian in East Ukraine. KIEV, Ukraine—Like a happy teen—and much to the surprise of his bodyguards—newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymir Zelensky jumped into a fountain last weekend as his tour of war-torn Ukraine’s eastern region promised to become historical, if not hysterical. In the city of Mariupol, not far from the front lines, a flock of local kids followed the president in his soaking wet suit as he sprinted among jets of water. You don’t see many top officials in post-Soviet countries horsing around with kids like this. Actually, you wouldn’t have seen any before Zelensky, the former TV comedian who played an accidental president only to be elected for real in May, and by a landslide. Witnesses said the scene was like a “medicine” for people in the strategic port city, which has buried hundreds of civilians and soldiers in the past five years of war. Just a few weeks ago the 41-year-old Zelensky won his office by declaring he was a tough leader coming to break the old molds in Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy, and since the day of his inauguration the list of radical decisions has been growing. Zelensky dissolved the parliament and sent a clear message to Moscow about its incursions in the east of the country since 2014: both “Donbass and Crimea are Ukraine,” he declared unequivocally, even though Russian President Vladimir Putin has annexed Crimea. Zelensky quickly fired Ukraine’s top officials, appointing instead young, reliably loyal friends of his to the key positions. His critics said that it was a new style of cronyism, doubting that his new people with little or no experience in public office could handle important decisions, expose billion-dollar corruption, and investigate dozens of murders committed during the Ukrainian revolution of 2014, as well as other major crimes. But Zelensky continued to appoint people he could trust. Zelensky has defined two wars in Ukraine, “the war with Russia and the war with corruption.” During his meetings in France and Germany this week, Zelensky focused on ending the war in Donbass and bringing dozens of Ukrainian prisoners back home. If that did not work, he called to expand the mechanism of sanctions against Russia. “The strategic course of Ukraine to achieve full-fledged membership in the E.U. and NATO, which is secured in the constitution of Ukraine, remains unchanged,” he said at a meeting with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg earlier this month. The war on corruption promises to be tough and long. Last month in a Delaware court Ukraine’s Privat Bank filed a suit against Zelensky’s longtime business partner, Ihor Kolomoisky, for “hundreds of millions of dollars,” accusing the oligarch of “unjust enrichment” in “a series of brazen fraudulent schemes.” Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenskaya, admitted to The Daily Beast that her husband was upset about the accusations against his former business partner, the patron of the television network where he made his fame. But she insisted that President Zelensky was independent from the oligarch. “Volodymyr is never going to be anybody’s puppet,” she said. In spite of recommendations from Washington’s special envoy for Ukraine, Kurt Walker, Zelensky appointed his 42-year-old aide on legal issues, Andrei Bogdan, to be head of the presidential administration. He made his childhood friend, Ivan Bakanov, the acting head of the SBU, the Security Service of Ukraine. It is still a question when, if ever, Zelensky is going to negotiate peace with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Moscow has made it clear that it will not accept Ukraine integrating fully with the E.U. and NATO, and for now Moscow is accusing Ukraine of “aggression.” On Thursday the editor-in-chief of Russia Today, Margarita Simonyan, said that Ukraine had conducted a denial of service attack on Moscow’s call center for Putin’s annual question and answer session. In a gesture respected by many in Kiev, Zelensky did not welcome attempts by Donald Trump’s lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, to politicize Ukraine’s investigations of former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort and, in a separate case, former Vice President Joe Biden’s son, Hunter Biden. Yuliya Mostovaya, editor of Mirror Weekly and a wise analyst of Ukraine’s politics for three decades, told The Daily Beast that Zelensky is still enjoying “the lightness of being” with no memory of Soviet, post-Soviet, or even post-revolutionary intrigues in the government. “Yes, maybe he does not realize the scale of responsibility, yet, but to every splash of criticism I want to say, ‘Maybe that’s the way to do it.’”
The representatives of NATO Parliamentary Assembly are ready to visit the demarcation line in the Eastern districts of Ukraine, as the President of the Assembly Madeleine Moon said at a briefing in Kyiv, Interfax-Ukraine reported. “We are ready to support Ukraine. We stand by your side and as I have said at our meeting with President Zelensky, if there is such opportunity and he regards this necessary, we are ready to go to the demarcation line to see what is going on there, what is going on in the conflict zone and bring it to the parliamentarians of 29 and soon 30 states which are the members of NATO Parliamentary Assembly,” she said. Moon also said that she invited President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky to visit autumn session of the Assembly in London and speak before the delegates of member states of the Alliance.
BRUSSELS -- Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has promised to hold a referendum on NATO membership -- a move strongly opposed by Moscow -- as the country embarks on a path of European and Euro-Atlantic integration. Speaking in an interview on June 5 with RFE/RL that also ran on Ukraine's 1+1 channel, the recently elected Zelenskiy said Ukraine and its people had the right as a sovereign nation to choose the alliances they desire, regardless of outside opinions. "I said that we need to inform each Ukrainian about what NATO is like, which is not so terrible, and when Ukrainians are ready, we will definitely bring this issue to a referendum, and Ukraine will definitely be in NATO," said the former comic actor with no prior political experience who took over as president two weeks ago. Zelenskiy made the comments on the second and last day of his visit to Brussels -- his first foreign trip since being elected -- where he held talks with top European Union and NATO officials. A day earlier, Zelenskiy said that Ukraine's "strategic course to achieve full-fledged membership in the EU and NATO" remained unchanged from the goal of his predecessor, Petro Poroshenko. Moscow has made explicit its opposition to NATO's further expansion, especially as regards to Ukraine and Georgia. Tbilisi is also seeking to become a member of the Western military alliance. Fighting between government forces and Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine has killed some 13,000 people since April 2014, shortly after Russia seized control of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula. Cease-fire deals announced as part of the Minsk accords in September 2014 and February 2015 have contributed to a decrease in fighting in the eastern provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk but have failed to hold. NATO and the European Union have invested heavily in Ukraine and its 44 million people, who in addition to the conflict and Russia's occupation of Crimea face entrenched corruption and major economic hurdles. NATO chief Jens Stoltenberg has called Ukraine a "highly valued partner" that does not "recognize Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea."
Evidently not, and as a result, NATO has become a vacuum cleaner, sucking into its club Eastern European nations that were once under the aegis of the former Soviet Union. I don’t know which came first, the chicken or the egg, just like I don’t know if NATO deployed first to Eastern Europe and Russia responded by creating problems for us around the world or the other way around. But NATO’s presence in former Warsaw Pact countries is arguably the major national security issue for Russia and the stumbling block to a better relationship. As NATO continues on its merry way, Russia will become more threatening. Last summer, thousands of NATO troops participated in an exercise in Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia — Russia’s backyard and places most Americans wouldn’t fight for. Now Russia is giving us a taste of our own medicine: It plans to deploy nuclear-capable TU-160 bombers on a Venezuelan island base less than 1,400 miles from Miami. I’m not pleased. I live in Ft. Lauderdale.
For nearly thirty years, successive U.S. administrations have struggled to come up with a sustainable policy toward Russia. Throughout this period, the U.S.-Russian relationship has experienced a familiar pattern of boom-bust cycles: a new administration comes in dissatisfied with the state of the relationship and promises to do better. It launches a policy review that generates a reset aimed at developing a partnership. A period of optimism follows, but obstacles to better relations emerge, and optimism gradually gives way to pessimism. By the end of the administration, the relationship is at the lowest point since the end of the Cold War. Russia, with its disruptive and often rogue actions, bears a major share of the responsibility for the deterioration in the relationship. But U.S. policy toward Russia has largely ignored such crucial factors as Russia’s history, culture, geography, and security requirements—as they are seen from Moscow. For three decades, U.S. administrations have pursued the same unrealistic policies and contributed to the failure of the relationship. Two in particular stand out: a refusal to accept Russia for what it is, as evidenced by repeated initiatives to reform and remake its political system, despite the Kremlin’s rejection of democracy promotion in and around Russia as a threat to Russian domestic stability; and insistence that NATO is the only legitimate security organization for Europe and Eurasia and the extension of the Euro-Atlantic security architecture to the Eurasian space surrounding Russia, which in Moscow’s eyes represented a threat to Russian security. Several other patterns in U.S. policy toward Russia account for the failures over the past three decades. Overreach has been a persistent feature of U.S. Russia policy, reflected in commitments to ambitious goals without the means to accomplish them. U.S. policymakers have repeatedly exaggerated America’s ability to affect developments in Russia and their influence over the Kremlin. They have defined American interests in the most expansive terms, failing to distinguish between core and peripheral concerns or to prioritize them. When Moscow pushed back, Washington reasserted its right and responsibility to teach Russia and its neighbors how to manage their affairs rather than take account of Russian objections. It is hard to escape the conclusion that a more restrained U.S. approach to dealing with Russia and the states of the former Soviet Union could have resulted in a more productive U.S.-Russian relationship. Changing the trajectory of U.S.-Russian relations will be difficult. Russia’s image is toxic in the current U.S. political climate, and as a result there will be few opportunities for cooperation even where Washington and Moscow have common interests. Russia is vitally important to the United States, however, and managing this relationship responsibly—even if not necessarily making it better or solving problems—is a task that U.S. policymakers can ill afford to neglect. Yet the difficulty of managing the relationship is compounded by the fact that both countries are set in their respective approaches to each other and will find it hard to change course. Russian leaders see their country as a great power in charge of its own destiny. They do not accept American primacy and want to accelerate the transition from a unipolar to a multipolar world; they reject democracy promotion as a cover for U.S.-sponsored regime change; they believe they are entitled to a sphere of influence and will resist perceived U.S. intrusions; and they rely on anti-Americanism to legitimize their unpopular policies with domestic audiences. The post–Cold War consensus in the United States—its primacy in a unipolar world, insistence on no spheres of influence, and commitment to democracy promotion—is baked into its foreign policy DNA. In today’s poisoned climate, where Russia is seen as the cause of many problems in the world, changing that consensus will be an uphill struggle. To break out of this impasse, the United States will have to—for its part—make several key adjustments to its Russia policy, including: prioritize U.S. interests vis-à-vis Russia and focus on the essentials—the nuclear relationship and strategic stability; leave Russia’s internal affairs for Russians to untangle; halt NATO’s eastward expansion and refocus on the alliance’s core mission of collective defense; be clear with Ukraine and Georgia that they should not base their foreign policies on the assumption that they will join NATO, but sustain robust programs of security cooperation with them; and rethink the sanctions policy toward Russia and use them with restraint. These changes will not, by themselves, guarantee a different U.S. relationship with Russia, since the Kremlin would also have to make major changes in Russia’s foreign policy behavior. But pursuing the same policy and expecting different results is not a sound approach for the United States. At the very least, the proposed changes would restore a measure of realism, prudence, and discipline to U.S. policy; more closely align the ends and means of U.S. policy toward Russia; avoid inflicting further harm to the relationship; hold the door open for cooperation on shared interests; and shed the chronic habit of overpromising and underdelivering. These are not grandiose or transformational objectives, but they are realistic and attainable and will help the two countries manage their differences more effectively. To quote the great philosopher and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, sometimes it is best to find “proximate solutions to insoluble problems.”When they have command of their senses, U.S. policymakers tend to think better of involving our nation deeply in Ukraine. So this week’s calls from lawmakers and policy wonks to arm Ukraine are a sign that the Trump and Russia scandals have concussed our political class.
That said, it would be quite difficult to blame NATO for having misgivings. After all, apart from previous challenges, Ukraine has now accumulated new, and in many ways much more serious, problems, including: Endemic corruption, which has not declined, and arguably even increased since 2014. Russian sources enjoy quoting Transparency International (in whose Corruption Perceptions Index Ukraine slipped from 118th to 120th of 180 countries in 2018) and Ernst & Young (bottom place out of 41 countries in Europe, Asia and Africa).11 A side from these (perhaps overrated) indicators, the most recent corruption-related scandal in the Ukrainian defence industry is, perhaps, the most worrying and outrageous episode, especially given the state of virtual war the country has been in since 2014. In the light of this scandal it seems unlikely that Ukraine has scored any points to help change its image in the Alliance in general and some of its members in particular. Indeed, one could presume that misgivings, even among Ukraine’s staunchest supporters, have increased. In any case, Ukraine’s ability to deal with corruption effectively and efficiently, irrespective of the results of the presidential elections, is, to say the least, doubtful. Unfortunately, given specific traits of the post-Soviet mentality (which is still firmly in place), referring to examples of fighting corruption in other countries is nothing but rhetoric. Incompatibility of military technology. In effect, despite some progress by the Ukrainian military-industrial complex (and significant potential that still exists),12 what can currently be seen is a “hybrid” between Soviet patterns and some (rapidly made) post-2014 modifications. In this respect, Ukraine has two options: Follow the Russian path, requiring almost complete restructuring of the whole sector, which would take at least two decades. Even if successful, this will not eliminate the compatibility problem. A “Buy from NATO” policy, which could eliminate the gap much more quickly. However, given the lack of economic means, this option does not appear realistic. The “Donbas factor”. With the Donbas becoming a “frozen conflict”, it seems doubtful that NATO would—despite optimistic rhetoric in Kyiv and Brussels—be willing to accept a country in which military hostilities could start at any time. This is just one side of the coin. With Russia’s sway over Crimea, the Sea of Azov area (and the entire northern part of the Black Sea region) has de facto become a zone of perpetual risk. The most recent episode in the Kerch Strait vividly demonstrated that the Western response to Russia’s assertive behaviour does not go beyond rhetoric and moral support, and Moscow is now clearly aware of this. That said, the Sea of Azov has become a multinational “safe haven” for smuggling, with the active involvement of some EU and NATO member states13—an unpleasant reality that, even though hushed up, seems to suit all parties involved. The “Hungarian factor”, which, in fact, reaches well beyond Hungary itself. The notorious language issue, aggravated by disputes over the national memory, and minority rights are drumming up anti-Ukraine forces not merely in Hungary (which has been by far the most vocal) but also in Poland, Slovakia and some other countries, playing straight into the hands of the Kremlin, whose main propaganda anthem hangs on assumed “radicalism and suppression of ethnic minorities” in Ukraine. As argued earlier, this issue has gained a great deal of importance and could be used effectively as an argument or pretext to hinder Ukraine’s integration into Euro-Atlantic structures. Lastly, as noted by Jens Stoltenberg, Secretary General of NATO, Ukraine could count on full membership once it has dealt effectively with modernisation of its armed forces and corruption14—issues of an ongoing nature that are unlikely to be resolved in the foreseeable future. In effect this means an extremely polite, but rather firm, “no”.
The U.S. Army mission to train battalion sized units of the Ukraine National Guard has grown into an operation to develop a Ukraine-led training center. At Yavoriv, 55-day training rotations conducted by U.S. Army units focus on the training of brigade-sized Ukraine Army units and bring them in line with NATO interoperability standards. The UAF as a whole is being transformed into a military that is 100% interoperable with all other NATO forces, regardless of the fact that Ukraine is not an official member of the NATO alliance. An interview conducted as part of an article posted by Defense One in October of 2017 with a spokesperson for the Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine, U.S. Army National Guard Captain Kayla Christopher makes this extremely clear: Every 55 days we have a new battalion come in and we train them…And at the end of that 55-day period, we’ll do a field training exercise with that battalion. But that’s not the real end state. Essentially, what we’re trying to do is get them to the point where they are running their own combat training center. Our overall goal is essentially to help the Ukrainian military become NATO-interoperable. So the more they have an opportunity to work with different countries — not just the U.S., but all their Slavic neighbors, and all the other Western European countries that come.” Is this just another example of U.S. military “mission creep” or was it the intended mission from the outset? Despite the constant proclamations coming out of the U.S. State Department and the Pentagon that are adamant that Russian aid to the Donbass militias is a violation of international law and has only fueled the conflict in the country, the U.S. seems to have no issue with doing the same thing. The United States is not a party to the Minsk II agreement, nor is it bound in any formal defensive treaties with Ukraine, and yet it is playing a growing part in the military conflict in that country. The mission has also morphed from an effort to increase the law enforcement and civil defense capabilities of the Ukrainian National Guard, a very uncontroversial and unprovocative sounding aim, into a mission to train the entire UAF into a force that can fight alongside NATO forces. All the training being conducted at the Yavoriv Combat Training Center can be employed by the UAF in either defensive or offensive military operations. Capt. Kayla Christopher made it clear how the U.S. military views the Donbass Republics and why the Poroshenko regime labeled the initial attempt to take the rebellious oblasts by force as an anti-terrorism operation (ATO): They’re called anti-terrorism operations rather than something else because of the issue with the Russian-backed separatists. So they’re not really Russians, you know. They’re essentially terrorists.” For the past ten years, the main message emanating from NATO officials has boiled down to the following formula: “NATO’s doors are open to Ukraine”. The rhetoric has not changed dramatically since 2014, but the tone has. In an interview, Alejandro Alvargonzález (Assistant Secretary General for Political Affairs and Security Policy, and the de facto number three in the NATO hierarchy) said that “one day Ukraine will be granted membership” but this “is not a matter of one, two, or four years”. Aside from other must-do tasks indispensable for membership to happen, he noted that existing issues between Ukraine (“a partner”) and Hungary (“a valuable member of NATO”) could become one of the main obstacles on the road towards membership.9 An even more critical assessment was made by Lt Gen Jan Broeks, Director General of the NATO International Military Staff, who pointed out that achieving “technical and operational compatibility between NATO and Ukrainian armed forces might take decades”.10 In other words, a critical look at the rhetoric of NATO’s leadership paints an anything but optimistic picture of Ukrainian prospects for joining the bloc in the short or even medium term.
U.S. To Give $4 Million Toward Explosives Depots In Ukraine June 26, 2019 02:13 GMT By RFE/RL There have been several explosions and fires at arms depots in Ukraine in recent years. This blast at a munitions depot near the town of Ichnya in October prompted the evacuation of thousands of people. (file photo) There have been several explosions and fires at arms depots in Ukraine in recent years. This blast at a munitions depot near the town of Ichnya in October prompted the evacuation of thousands of people. (file photo) Share Print The United States says it has signed a memorandum of understanding with Ukraine to enhance the safety of the country’s stockpiles of conventional munitions. "The memorandum sets out a $4 million U.S. contribution toward construction of six explosive storehouses over the next two years for the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense," the State Department said in a statement on June 25. The document was signed by U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs R. Clarke Cooper and the acting director of the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry's Directorate of International Security, Ruslan Nimchynskyi. The statement said that the project will "enhance the safety and security of Ukraine’s munitions stockpiles, as well as advance Ukraine closer to its goal of meeting NATO and international standards for physical security and stockpile management." It said the U.S. Conventional Weapons Destruction program had invested more than $40 million from 2004 to 2018 "in support of Ukraine’s effort to address the legacy of the large quantities of conventional arms and ammunition inherited" after the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. In recent years, there have been several explosions and fires at arms depots in Ukraine, a country mired in a simmering war with Russia-backed separatists. Blasts at a munitions depot near the town of Ichnya in October last year prompted the evacuation of about 12,000 people.
Politically, the transfer of these weapons will have multiple effects. The lethal equipment from the United States may boost the morale of Ukrainian troops, among whom frustration with the long conflict is mounting, judging by the increased level of suicides at the front. As some U.S. weapons were already in Ukraine, via direct commercial sales, this move is designed to serve as encouragement for other NATO allies to start supplying Ukraine with weapons. This applies to those countries in particular that have already been supplying; mostly but not exclusively Central and Eastern European states, and lately Canada.
Yes, U.S.-Russia relations are destined to be poor at least as long as Vladimir Putin is president of the Russian Federation — a job he is likely to keep through 2024. And yes, as Trump's own national security team agrees, and as his new National Security Strategy reiterates, America and its allies need to recognize that we are in a protracted global geostrategic competition with Russia. However, the possibility of direct NATO-Russia war that could erupt, for example, if Putin decided to test our collective willingness to defend the Baltic states — formerly part of the Soviet Union, now NATO members and allies — is a potential threat to our very survival that we should be seeking ways to defuse. There is one way in which, without compromising our values or sacrificing the interests of any of our allies and friends, we may be able to help ratchet down the risks of NATO-Russia war. It begins by recognizing that NATO expansion, for all its past accomplishments, has gone far enough. We should seek, if Putin will do his part, to create a new security architecture for eastern Europe that would explicitly rule out bringing countries like Ukraine and Georgia into the 29-member alliance. Putin would have to agree not only to solve territorial disputes with his neighbors and end his aggressions against them, but to acknowledge their rights to join other organizations including someday the European Union. This concept would address the crisis in U.S.-Russia relations, and Trump's own dilemma, by taking a page out of former president Eisenhower's playbook: If you have an insoluble problem, enlarge it. We should consider a big idea — a new way to improve that part of the relationship that it may be within our power to do something about — while we otherwise continue to push back hard against every other element of aggressive Russian behavior around the world.
This week, President Trump is meeting with allied heads of state at a summit of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Among the many items on the agenda is the question of enlarging NATO to include other countries such as Ukraine. Although Russian aggression in Ukraine has been rightly condemned, those who urge for NATO to accept Ukraine as a full member are making a grave mistake. If Ukraine joined NATO, it would become an even more unstable hotspot that America would be obligated to defend. Why should the U.S. risk war with a nuclear-armed Russia in Moscow’s backyard? NATO is a military alliance to defend Europe, not a democracy-promotion machine intended to reorder the political equilibrium in every European country. Though Washington may wish it, NATO cannot solve every problem nor can it smooth over all local flash points. It’s easy to understand why some wish to bring Ukraine under the alliance’s security umbrella. After all, NATO has deterred Soviet and Russian aggression for nearly 70 years, and good Westerners who watched the Maidan protests have had their heart strings pulled. But expanding NATO means that if Ukraine asks for help in its current war, America’s sons and daughters will be called upon to die. If Trump and other administration officials asked American voters whether that’s something they want, the answer would be a firm “no.” Furthermore, calls for Ukraine to join NATO forget that deterrence works because it relies on mutually assured destruction (MAD) and on some level of respect for each side’s national interests. When one side communicates that it no longer cares about the other’s security concerns, the likelihood of war skyrockets. For instance, in 1962, when Moscow put missiles in Cuba, America reacted very forcefully to get the Soviet Union to remove them—even though doing so brought the world to the brink. Furthermore, in 1983, when NATO staged its largest-ever exercises under Reagan—known as Able Archer 83—the Soviet Union thought it was a cover for an attack and nearly launched their own nuclear strikes as a result. These same dynamics apply to Ukraine and the question of NATO accession. Although obviously the United States would never deliberately attack Russia, it doesn’t look that way from Moscow. Whether anyone likes it or not, Putin believes that Russia is reacting defensively and fears the possibility of a NATO-led overthrow of his government. He saw what happened when the Western-backed Maidan toppled Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and thinks America might be tempted to do the same to him. As a result of this—and of Putin’s general revisionism—Russia is the spoiler for any Ukrainian conflict and would likely escalate the use of force to keep Ukraine out of NATO. This is why U.S. deterrence wouldn’t apply as easily to Ukraine if it did start the process of joining NATO. If Russia was willing to annex Crimea and invade eastern Ukraine as a de facto veto on Ukraine’s NATO aspirations, it would certainly do far worse if official accession plans were announced. So far, NATO has pledged that Ukraine will one day join, but no such plans have been implemented. Additionally, it would likely take several years of reforms in accordance with a membership action plan before Ukraine could join NATO, which would give Russia time to react. If Russia believes Ukraine is worth fighting for, then America and NATO need to deeply consider the implications rather than just push ahead for membership. To ignore this reality is to be naïve about how the world works. America cannot be the world’s crusader for democracy in every crisis. Where would that end? The argument that other countries’ interests do not matter and that the U.S. just needs to bring everyone under its protective umbrella collapses on itself. Reduced to its absurd logical conclusion, that would mean America should try to protect literally every state on the planet from aggression and dictatorship while also preparing to fight anyone—even nuclear powers—who gets in the way. The brutal truth is that the U.S. needs to protect its own democracy and prosperity. We cannot always save the day and Washington can no more deliver a perfectly happy ending to Ukraine than it could to Iraq. As former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine Steven Pifer wrote, “Until the simmering conflict in the Donbas and frozen conflict in Crimea are resolved, Ukraine has little prospect of membership. Bringing Ukraine in with the ongoing disputes would mean that NATO would face an Article 5 contingency against Russia on day one of Kyiv’s membership.” Moreover, Henry Kissinger himself has urged that Ukraine ought to be considered a bridge between West and East rather than another potential NATO ally. Washington needs to realize that NATO’s expansion is not always in America’s interests and that in this case the cost would be far too high. The United States should focus on holding NATO’s interest-based red lines while also recognizing Russia’s interests—challenging them where we must but not in every possible circumstance. The alternative would be for the Second Cold War to drag on longer than is necessary to the risk of all.
Washington should stop adding to the Alliance new members who are security liabilities. Another day, another crisis in the relationship between Russia and Ukraine—and another powerful reminder why the latter should not be inducted into NATO. Washington has nothing at stake worth going to war over who has access to the Sea of Azov. The latest confrontation between Moscow and Kiev occurred when Russian vessels blocked Ukrainian vessels from moving into the shallow body of water between the two nations through the Kerch Strait. Kiev charged that Russia prevented lawful passage of its ships and instituted an illegal blockade. Moscow, in turn, claimed that the Ukrainians entered illegally and engaged in “aggressive” maneuvers. A Russian gunboat shot up a Ukrainian vessel, injuring several sailors. Full-scale war is possible. Both sides had been increasing military forces in the region. Although Russian president Vladimir Putin does not appear to be stoking nationalist fires at home, Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko is an underdog for reelection and might benefit from a crisis. The latter called a war cabinet meeting, warned of possible conflict, and instituted martial law (which would allow postponing the election). The Rada is considering declaring a state of war with Russia. Demonstrators have taken to Kiev’s streets. The Putin government, which has harassed Ukrainian marine traffic entering what is essentially an enclosed sea, looks mostly to blame. Moscow’s aggressiveness might be a negotiating tactic or part of a campaign to turn the Sea of Azov into de facto territorial waters. Still, Moscow is not without security concerns. The Kerch Strait Bridge is a possible target. Indeed, in May Washington Examiner columnist Tom Rogan argued that “Ukraine should now destroy elements of the bridge. While that course of action would be an escalation against Putin and one that would almost certainly spark Russian retaliation, this bridge is an outrageous affront to Ukraine's very credibility as a nation.” Worse, Rogan declared: “The U.S. could and should support Ukraine here with confidence in our own military power.” Even if an election-minded Poroshenko eschews taking such a risk, nationalist and neo-fascist militias might not be so restrained. So far the crisis is contained. The UN Security Council met but will take no action with Russia as a member. Poroshenko requested support via tweet: “We appeal to the partner countries under the Budapest Memorandum, to the EU countries, to participants of the Normandy format in order to coordinate effective measures to protect Ukraine. We appeal to the whole pro-Ukrainian coalition: we must stand united!” That’s quite a list. It includes, respectively, the United States and United Kingdom, most of Europe, and France and Germany. However, if one thing is certain, it is that the continent will do nothing. The EU did issue a statement: “We expect Russia to restore freedom of passage at the Kerch Strait and urge all to act with utmost restraint to de-escalate the situation immediately.” But most European governments aren’t particularly interested in defending themselves. They certainly won’t launch a glorious crusade on behalf of Ukraine, which they won’t admit to either the EU or NATO. America is the only nation on that list that matters. Washington would be expected to do the heavy lifting in any war that includes Moscow, handle the nuclear exchange, conduct the air war, resupply the allied combatants, clear the seas, manage the ground campaign, and take the casualties. The UK and France would help out. Poland would contribute. Everyone else would offer advice and hope that Russia fired its weapons over them toward North America. This should remind us that we are lucky (or blessed) President George W. Bush failed in his effort to add Kiev (and Georgia) to NATO. Had he succeeded Washington would have been obligated to come to Ukraine’s defense if it invoked Article 5 against Moscow. Backed by the United States, Kiev would have been much more likely to take a belligerent approach toward Russia. Poroshenko would have advanced his reelection prospects and possibly  triggered the sort of war that only offers the possibility of reclaiming Crimea. While alliances deter, they also ensnare. If war breaks out, then Washington is automatically involved. And war becomes more likely when governments believe they can borrow the U.S. armed forces for their own purposes, which makes them more reckless. It is fine to be “pro-Ukrainian,” as Poroshenko put it. Russia’s various assaults on Ukraine were wrong. However, there is no cause for Washington to go to war. First, Kiev is of little security interest to the West. Ukraine suffered as part of the Russian Empire and Soviet Union, without any meaningful impact on America or Europe. Ukraine’s current travails are unsettling but not threatening to anyone else. . Moreover, Kiev, the Europeans, and America are hardly blameless. Ukraine is no beau ideal of democracy. Moreover, years after backing a “color revolution” in Kiev (which made the disastrous incompetent Viktor Yushchenko president), Washington and Brussels cheerfully encouraged a street putsch against the elected though flawed leader who leaned toward Russia. U.S. officials unashamedly talked about who they wanted to take over as Ukraine’s prime minister. Ukraine’s economic orientation toward Europe and membership in NATO was supposed to follow. That didn’t warrant war by Moscow, but Washington would have taken, shall we say, a dim view if the situation was reversed and Russia intervened in Mexico, installing its preferred leaders and pushing the country toward membership in the Warsaw Pact. Needed is a general settlement covering Ukraine and Georgia. Crimea won’t go back to Ukraine without Moscow’s defeat in war. Russia is unlikely to stop stirring the pot in Ukraine’s Donbass region  so long as NATO membership is a formal objective. The statement would serve as a strategy to bring peace and stability, if not liberalism and democracy, to that part of the world. The allies close NATO’s doors and drop sanctions, without formally recognizing Crimea’s annexation. Russia ends its support for Ukrainian separatists and halts other destabilizing activities, such as interfering with Ukrainian shipping entering the Sea of Azov. Georgia and Ukraine lean however they wish culturally, economically, and politically, but abandon efforts to become a Western military tripwire. No one is happy. Everyone prospers with the result. Weirdly, the one policy that appears to unite anti-Trump liberals and neoconservative hawks centers around Russia. Both are intent on making Moscow an enduring enemy, with no gain for America. At times this bizarre alliance appears to wish it could launch the first missile targeting the Russian Federation. If Kiev was a NATO member, then the bipartisan war hawks just might have gotten their chance. NATO has outlived its usefulness. It risks dragging America into an unnecessary war in which most European allies would do little more than watch. Getting out is more complex than getting in. In the meantime, Washington should stop adding to it new members that are security liabilities. The Trump administration should instead focus on engaging in serious negotiations to end the neo-Cold War that has developed between Washington and Moscow.
Placing Ukraine on the path to NATO membership is currently promoted by Kiev and some forces in the West, who believe in getting tough with Russia. There are plenty of reasons why the West wants to rein Russia in. The war with Georgia in August 2008, the recent annexation of Crimea and the hybrid war in Ukraine are all evidence of expansionist behavior that concerns Europe and the United States. Some see arming Ukraine, and making it a NATO member, as the best way of achieving stability. This, however, is a dangerous idea. There are reasons to believe that the move will provoke Russia, a country that already feels threatened by the West’s growing influence in Eastern Europe ever since the collapse of communism. To Russian foreign policy experts, NATO remains one of the most tangible threats to the country. That is no surprise, given that it was created as a Western alliance against the Soviet Union. In 2008, the United States first started openly pushing for Georgia and Ukraine’s membership in the alliance. At the time, Russia responded with alarm. As early as June 2006, Russia’s foreign minister said that Ukraine or Georgia joining NATO could lead to a colossal shift in global geopolitics. Fearful of the consequences of admitting the countries into the alliance, France and Germany managed to block membership at the NATO Summit in April 2008, which was held in Bucharest. It is not just NATO that has Russia on edge. The United States and other leading Western nations like France, Britain and Germany, endorsed the “color revolutions” in former Soviet countries like Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and Ukraine, which were seen as highly destabilizing by Russia. Then, in February 2014, Western governments supported the Maidan protests in Kiev, which the Kremlin feared could be a prelude to revolution in Russia itself. As President Vladimir Putin put it in his Crimea speech, “with Ukraine, our Western partners have crossed the line, playing the bear and acting irresponsibly and unprofessionally.” The tense stand-off that followed between the West and Russia resulted in an ever-worsening situation in Ukraine and the widest-ranging sanctions against Russia since the end of the Cold War. Relations keep hitting new lows, and will only deteriorate further if NATO membership for Ukraine remains on the Western agenda. Is the West prepared for an aggressive response by Putin to the perceived NATO threat? Putin has boldly tested the West’s will on numerous occasions. The European Leadership Initiative Network recently issued a report in which it documented about 40 dangerous incidents between Russia and NATO planes since March 2014. The incidents included “violations of national airspace, emergency scrambles, narrowly avoided mid-air collisions, close encounters at sea, simulated attack runs and other dangerous happenings,” according to the report. Among the routine skirmishes taking place, there have been 11 “serious” incidents, such Russian planes flying unusually close to Western warships. More worryingly still, three incidents last year ran a high risk of leading to either casualties or direct military intervention. The ‘submarine hunt’ in Swedish waters in October, the Russian abduction of a veteran Estonian intelligence officer in September, and a near-collision of a Russian surveillance plane with an SAS flight from Copenhagen, Denmark, to Rome in March: all of these incidents could have led to unintended escalation. Meanwhile, the West seems unwilling to respond to Russia with resolve. Russia seized the Estonian officer a mere two days after President Barack Obama visited Tallinn and promised Estonia full military support. NATO and the European Union called for a strong response to the incident, but so far no such response followed, indicating the lack of will to engage with an aggressive Russia. In Russia, support for robust actions only grows stronger by the day. Due to the economic sanctions and domestic propaganda campaign, the overwhelming majority of Russians now view the Western nations as enemies seeking to destroy Russia and its leaders. If need be, the Kremlin will have no serious difficulty finding public support for an outright military intervention in Ukraine. The solution to this is not NATO membership for Ukraine. Such a move will only contribute to turning Russia from an angry but manageable power into a real enemy and, possibly, starting a wider war in Europe. Stability hinges on the West agreeing not to pull Ukraine into NATO or the EU. For the time being, it is beneficial to have Russia as a co-provider of Ukraine’s security and development, together with the West. In a longer run, a new conference on European security must be called to formally end the post-Cold War era and establish a security system with Russia and Ukraine as key players.
In array of news stories over the past two weeks confirms that Washington’s NATO allies are increasingly defiant toward U.S. policy objectives that they consider misguided or merely inconvenient. One prominent blow came when Turkey finalized its purchase of S-400 air defense missiles. Trump administration officials had told President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s government for months that executing that deal was unacceptable. Not only would the S-400s be incompatible with systems that other NATO members were deploying, thus undermining a coordinated NATO air defense, but the purchase symbolized a disturbingly cozy relationship that was developing between Turkey and Russia. The administration warned its Turkish ally that “ grave consequences ” would occur unless Ankara backed away from the sale. Yet Erdogan seems intent on ignoring Washington’s thinly veiled threat.
What's at stake for the Russians? Russian investment flows in Venezuela since 2005 total around $17 billion , based largely on known investments made by Rosneft, Russia's biggest oil company. Since 2016 Rosneft has lent around $6 billion to PdVSA in the form of pre-payments for oil deliveries. According to Rosneft's 2018 financial statements, Venezuela's outstanding debt to Rosneft was $2.6 billion as of Dec. 31, 2018. That suggests that around $400 million has been repaid. Rosneft also holds minority stakes in five oil ventures with PdVSA. They have a sizeable stake in Citgo, PdVSA's oil refiner and gasoline station. Pompeo knows this, of course, and could offer Russia assurances that Rosneft won't lose its position should Maduro and the ruling Socialists United leave power. But if Russia keeps protecting Maduro, then anything goes with Rosneft and Citgo. It's plausible. Rosneft is already sanctioned by the U.S. and so the Treasury Department could easily make life more difficult for Rosneft to own Citgo assets in the U.S.
The narrative goes that Washington should give Moscow a free hand in Ukraine — in return for Moscow supposedly giving Washington a free hand to unseat Venezuela’s venal and criminal Maduro regime. This narrative also argues that Washington should simply extend the New START Treaty for five years, while resuming arms control talks with Moscow.
Third, in Venezuela, the issue is not so much Russian forces but Cuban forces, which are not bound by any bilateral Russo-American agreement. Thus, this narrative essentially represents a weakening of U.S. security and America’s global position.
Russia exported just $36 million worth of goods to Venezuela in the first four months of this year, less than half the amount it sent three years ago, according to Russian customs data. Russian wheat sales to Venezuela, which Mr. Maduro touted as the replacement for American grain, plummeted 60 percent, to 187,000 tons, during Russia’s agricultural export season ending in April, compared with the same period a year earlier, the customs data shows. These amounts cover only a tenth of Venezuela’s annual wheat demand. Moscow’s largest banks have largely shunned Mr. Maduro’s attempts to move Venezuelan government accounts to Russia to escape American sanctions, according to two people knowledgeable about the matter who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to the press. The widespread use of the dollar in the Russian financial system means the risk of American sanctions greatly outweighs potential earnings from new Venezuelan business, they said. None of the top 15 Russian banks had meaningful loans to Venezuelan entities as of April, according to their regulatory filings. State-controlled Gazprombank, which used to be one of the main European bankers for the Venezuelan national oil company, Pdvsa, in April erased nearly all of its Venezuelan credit portfolio after having quit a joint banking venture with Mr. Maduro’s government, the filings show. Even Russian weapons trade with Venezuela, the cornerstone of the countries’ economic relations, has been hit by Mr. Maduro’s financial woes. Russia’s industrial conglomerate Rostec, which accounts for the bulk of the country’s defense exports, has reduced its exposure to Venezuela because of unpaid invoices, according to two people close to the company who discussed national security matters on condition of anonymity. The company has chosen not to renew some weapons maintenance contracts and freeze other projects, they said. Former President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela, center, applauding a worker during a visit to a weapons factory in Russia in 2006. The multibillion-dollar deals for Russian weapons he signed are long gone. This includes the Kalashnikov machine gun factory in the central city of Maracay, which remains unfinished 12 years after the start of construction. Arms sales can be a politicized business, but it is still business, and it has to make economic sense, said one of those familiar with Rostec. A Rostec spokeswoman said the company’s staff in Venezuela has remained unchanged in recent years and its technicians come and go according to its projects’ needs. The multibillion-dollar deals for Russian weapons signed by Mr. Maduro’s charismatic predecessor, Hugo Chávez, are long gone. In the past two years, Russia exported $1 million worth of goods to Venezuela under the “secret” customs code that includes military and security equipment, according to Russian customs. “We absolutely, officially have sold weapons to Venezuela,” Mr. Putin told reporters last week. “We have not done it for quite a while now.” Though limited, Russia’s economic help did allow Mr. Maduro to maintain some revenue flow amid tightening American sanctions. The Moscow-based bank Eurofinance Mosnarbank, which is jointly owned by the Russian and Venezuelan governments and is under United States sanctions, continues to process payments for Pdvsa, according to bank wire receipts seen by The New York Times. The Russian government responded to American sanctions against the bank in March by taking control of the lender. The Pdvsa petroleum complex, José Antonio Anzoátegui. Venezuela’s oil output plummeted 35 percent since the American sanctions in January, one of the steepest declines of production in modern history. Despite these moves, Russia remains overtly supportive of Mr. Maduro’s administration, and is part of his major remaining economic and political bulwark. “Our relations with Venezuela are of strategic nature,” Moscow’s ambassador to Caracas, Vladimir Zaemsky, said after the arrival of two Russian military planes in Venezuela in March. “We’re prepared, as always, to provide complete support to the lawful government of Venezuela and the Venezuelan people.” Rostec’s inauguration of a helicopter training center in Venezuela in late March provided an important public relations boost to Mr. Maduro. Rosneft, in particular, has helped Pdvsa to redirect some of its oil exports, targeted by American sanctions, to Asia. The Russian firm bought the oil in five of seven tankers that left Venezuela in the first half of May, according to Pdvsa data. Rosneft, which has taken on the risky but lucrative role of Pdvsa’s partner of last resort, has said its operations in Venezuela are strictly commercial and compliant with American sanctions. But even it has refrained from putting new money into Venezuela. The company’s outstanding loans to Pdvsa have fallen by more than half in the past year to $1.8 billion, according to its financial statements. And Rosneft’s lifeline has not been enough to prevent the collapse of Venezuela’s already struggling oil industry. The national oil output plummeted 35 percent since the American sanctions in January, one of the steepest declines of production in modern history, according to estimates by the Institute of International Finance. “If I was a Venezuelan general debating my future, I wouldn’t count on Russia coming to the rescue,” said Mr. Hess.
President Trump won't cut support for Ukraine in exchange for Russia doing the same with Venezuela, U.S. officials said as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo prepared to meet Russian President Vladimir Putin. “There is no equivalence between Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the international community’s efforts to support Venezuelan democracy and the Venezuelan people,” a senior administration official told the Washington Examiner. “The United States is giving no consideration to any such preposterous proposal.” The contours of such a proposal have been leaking out of Moscow in recent weeks. The United States has struggled to aid opposition leader Juan Guaidó in ousting Venezuelan strongman Nicolás Maduro, who is being propped up by Putin. Pompeo accused the Kremlin earlier this month of telling Maduro to stay put when he was about to relinquish power and flee the country in the face of widespread protests. Putin, meanwhile, has sought to undermine Western opposition to his invasion of eastern Ukraine, begun in 2014, and implement a peace deal that would leave him with substantial influence within the country. “I don't think they really want the territory, and they don’t want to see it as independent,” Kurt Volker, the State Department’s top diplomat for the Ukraine crisis, told the Washington Examiner. “I think what Russia wants is to use eastern Ukraine as a pressure point on the rest of Ukraine and try to influence politics inside Ukraine.” Russian officials thought they achieved that goal during the Minsk cease-fire talks between the Ukrainian government and Russian-backed separatists in 2015. The warring sides agreed to rewrite the Ukrainian constitution in a way the Kremlin believed would allow its proxies to block any effort by Ukraine to join NATO. But Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko refused to agree to a constitution that would give semi-autonomous, pro-Russian forces veto power over Ukrainian foreign policy. So Putin has been looking at Venezuela as a valuable bargaining chip. “For Moscow, a deal of equals on Venezuela where Russia helps the U.S. [defuse] the crisis by engineering a constitutional transition, should involve an equally significant concession by the U.S.,” a Moscow Times columnist wrote in outlining Putin’s position. “Withdrawing Russian military support for Maduro should also be matched by the withdrawal of U.S. military assistance to Ukraine.” That’s not going to happen, Trump administration officials say. The Kremlin’s dream scenario isn’t even feasible, one U.S. official familiar with the Ukraine negotiations added. “Ukraine has a big say in this. They are not our client, they don't do what we tell them,” the official said on condition of anonymity. “Then you have France and Germany and the European Union involved, and all of these players are not going to act on some behind-the-door, Trump-Putin secret deal — and I'm not even saying that that's what our president would do." The official added that "even if the president wanted to do that, he couldn’t.” The same goes for Western military assistance to Ukraine. “The Ukrainian military has gotten a lot better because of NATO support,” as opposed simply to U.S. assistance, the official said. And the additional U.S. aid is “set by Congress, and that’s not going to change.” So the stalemates could continue far longer than outside observers anticipated. Trump’s national security team hasn’t been able to deliver “an easy off-ramp for Maduro, as some would have hoped,” a senior State Department official acknowledged in March. And Putin recently announced a plan to grant Russian passports to some eastern Ukrainians, a provocative move that suggests he has no intention to yield in any negotiations with newly elected Volodymyr Zelensky, who's about to take office as Ukraine's president. “I don't think that we can flip a switch and just have the Russians say, ‘Oh, OK, we'll get out,'” Volker said. Instead, U.S. officials hope Russia will eventually tire of the sanctions imposed in response to the Ukraine invasion, especially if Moscow concludes that the “frozen conflict” is driving Ukrainians into Western arms. “You don't push Russia around and say, ‘OK, this is it,'" Volker added. "We create a position that we think is going to be successful, and I think we can all see that — I mean a successful Ukraine — and then they'll have to adjust.”
When they have command of their senses, U.S. policymakers tend to think better of involving our nation deeply in Ukraine. So this week’s calls from lawmakers and policy wonks to arm Ukraine are a sign that the Trump and Russia scandals have concussed our political class. Sending weapons to Kiev makes no more sense today than it did two years ago. You may recall the last time “arming Ukraine” was floated. In 2015, fearing a Western-backed putsch would permanently pull the country from Russia’s sphere of influence, Vladimir Putin took a gamble to preserve the Kremlin’s access to the Black Sea Fleet and annexed Crimea. Contrary to popular perception, this was not a demonstration of Kremlin strength, but a last resort. A truly strong Russia would have been able to keep Kiev under its influence and preserve its access to the Black Sea without force. In fact, in 2010 Putin used his popularity in Ukraine and Russia’s diplomatic might to help his preferred candidate, the fantastically corrupt grifter, Viktor Yanukovych, over the line in presidential elections. Ukraine is a deeply divided country. Its most-recent presidential elections revealed a stark conflict between the agrarian, Ukrainian-speaking north and west on one hand and the Russian-speaking south and east on the other. It is also not a particularly admirable state. Successive governments in Kiev have turned out to be ineffective and/or hopelessly corrupt. Even the Western-supported Viktor Yushchenko arguably usurped the role of Ukraine’s courts when dissolving Parliament in 2007. This is not a stable democracy. It is also a country many Russians see as deeply woven into their own history. Anti-Communist dissident Alexander Solzhenitsyn summed up some of the Russian attitude toward Ukraine when he wrote in 1990 that, “All talk of a separate Ukrainian people existing since something like the ninth century and possessing its own non-Russian language is a recently-invented falsehood.” Poland ceded Kiev to Peter the Great in the 1690s. Needless to say, Russia has a much longer history with Ukraine than the United States can claim. Ukrainian membership in NATO periodically comes up, but Ukraine would be one of the most difficult countries for NATO to defend, while contributing little to the alliance, partly because its government is so indebted to the Russian state. Yes, Putin’s government continues to foment pro-Russian unrest and separatism in the Donetsk region. But giving Ukraine some anti-tank weaponry would not meaningfully deter Moscow’s aggression. Russia is a massive land power, with over 20,000 tanks. The Russian state and the Russian public have both proven willing to lose troops in battle over the last two decades of vicious wars in Chechnya. Russia has many economic levers of influence over Ukraine, ones that the West could not help to match without now-unthinkable commitments of political will and ready cash. And sending arms to Kiev would play right into Putin’s narrative of Western meddling, which has been hugely effective in swaying its target audience: Russian-speaking Ukrainians see the U.S. as complicit in overturning a democratic result in 2015, even if their defense of the result is that they cheated to get it fair and square. Ultimately, Ukraine is of peripheral interest to the United States and Western Europe even if annoying Russia has incredible appeal right now. Giving it arms, or extending to it a kind of quasi-membership in NATO might irritate Russia, but it would also create a new dependent for the U.S. And it could embolden Ukrainian nationalists to do something foolish, the way that Mikheil Saakashvili jeopardized Georgia in 2008 by acting provocatively once he thought he had the backing of the West. Punishing Russia is obviously at the top of our leaders’ minds. But arming Ukraine would mean escalating tensions precisely where American commitments can do the least good and are not at all credible. There are better ways to get Vladimir Putin’s goat. We should consider them, instead.
Sending weapons to Kiev makes no more sense today than it did two years ago. You may recall the last time “arming Ukraine” was floated. In 2015, fearing a Western-backed putsch would permanently pull the country from Russia’s sphere of influence, Vladimir Putin took a gamble to preserve the Kremlin’s access to the Black Sea Fleet and annexed Crimea. Contrary to popular perception, this was not a demonstration of Kremlin strength, but a last resort. A truly strong Russia would have been able to keep Kiev under its influence and preserve its access to the Black Sea without force. In fact, in 2010 Putin used his popularity in Ukraine and Russia’s diplomatic might to help his preferred candidate, the fantastically corrupt grifter, Viktor Yanukovych, over the line in presidential elections. Ukraine is a deeply divided country. Its most-recent presidential elections revealed a stark conflict between the agrarian, Ukrainian-speaking north and west on one hand and the Russian-speaking south and east on the other. It is also not a particularly admirable state. Successive governments in Kiev have turned out to be ineffective and/or hopelessly corrupt. Even the Western-supported Viktor Yushchenko arguably usurped the role of Ukraine’s courts when dissolving Parliament in 2007. This is not a stable democracy. It is also a country many Russians see as deeply woven into their own history. Anti-Communist dissident Alexander Solzhenitsyn summed up some of the Russian attitude toward Ukraine when he wrote in 1990 that, “All talk of a separate Ukrainian people existing since something like the ninth century and possessing its own non-Russian language is a recently-invented falsehood.” Poland ceded Kiev to Peter the Great in the 1690s. Needless to say, Russia has a much longer history with Ukraine than the United States can claim. Ukrainian membership in NATO periodically comes up, but Ukraine would be one of the most difficult countries for NATO to defend, while contributing little to the alliance, partly because its government is so indebted to the Russian state. Yes, Putin’s government continues to foment pro-Russian unrest and separatism in the Donetsk region. But giving Ukraine some anti-tank weaponry would not meaningfully deter Moscow’s aggression. Russia is a massive land power, with over 20,000 tanks. The Russian state and the Russian public have both proven willing to lose troops in battle over the last two decades of vicious wars in Chechnya. Russia has many economic levers of influence over Ukraine, ones that the West could not help to match without now-unthinkable commitments of political will and ready cash. And sending arms to Kiev would play right into Putin’s narrative of Western meddling, which has been hugely effective in swaying its target audience: Russian-speaking Ukrainians see the U.S. as complicit in overturning a democratic result in 2015, even if their defense of the result is that they cheated to get it fair and square. Ultimately, Ukraine is of peripheral interest to the United States and Western Europe even if annoying Russia has incredible appeal right now. Giving it arms, or extending to it a kind of quasi-membership in NATO might irritate Russia, but it would also create a new dependent for the U.S. And it could embolden Ukrainian nationalists to do something foolish, the way that Mikheil Saakashvili jeopardized Georgia in 2008 by acting provocatively once he thought he had the backing of the West. Punishing Russia is obviously at the top of our leaders’ minds. But arming Ukraine would mean escalating tensions precisely where American commitments can do the least good and are not at all credible. There are better ways to get Vladimir Putin’s goat. We should consider them, instead.
After a lengthy policy review and a considerable amount of discussion, the White House decided in December to overturn the previous administration’s position on U.S. weapons sales to Ukraine, an arms exporter. Washington would now approve lethal defensive weapons systems to Kiev ostensibly in order to improve Ukraine’s ability to defend itself against Russian-backed separatists operating in the east of the country. The State Department announced the first significant sale March 1 of 210 Javelin anti-tank missiles and 37 launchers with an estimated value of $47 million. Some leaders in Washington have advocated for the sale of missiles to damage or destroy Russian tanks in eastern Ukraine ever since Moscow intervened in its neighbor’s affairs. These weapons, however, will have no impact on the fighting beyond a front line that has been mostly static for years. Beyond the battlefield, however, this will further poison whatever bilateral relationship the U.S. has left with Russia — and that is bad for America. Sending arms to Ukraine is far more likely to escalate a conflict whose outcome is vital to Russia’s national security interest and, at best, peripheral to America’s. While deterring more violence in eastern Ukraine may be the stated objective, shipping advanced weapons into a conflict zone is bound to end up badly for Ukrainians — who simply want the violence to end — and for the United States, a country that should not be plunging into another tangential foreign policy commitment. At every point in the conflict when Kiev’s army was advancing on the ground, Russian President Vladimir Putin responded by pouring more military equipment, money and Russian military personnel into the Donbass on behalf of the separatists. The reason Moscow has responded in such a way to prevent a complete separatist collapse is realpolitik, plain and simple: Ukraine’s political loyalties are immensely important to Russia. It is simply inconceivable for Putin to allow a large neighboring state — that has historically been a connective tissue to the old Russian empire and the Soviet Union — to drift closer to Europe and act antagonistic toward Moscow. This is a strategic vulnerability for Russia, and one that he relies on as a buffer from perceived encroachment by liberal internationalists. Danish defense minister: Deterring Russia on the cyber battlefield Danish defense minister: Deterring Russia on the cyber battlefield Russia is in full swing, and NATO and the EU are responding. By: Claus Hjort Frederiksen Many in the West scoff at the idea that Russia’s desire for pliant neighbors or a strategic sphere of influence justifies its violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity. And indeed, these voices certainly have a point; was it not for Moscow’s military support in the form of hundreds of tanks, armor, air defense systems and intelligence assets, Ukraine’s war would likely be over and the Ukrainian military would be combing the Donbass today and reasserting Kiev’s control. Sign up for our Early Bird Brief Get the defense industry's most comprehensive news and information straight to your inbox Policymakers in the West rightly disapprove of Russia’s actions, and we should not excuse Moscow’s policy. But our responsibility is to understand why the Russians are doing what they are doing so we can make informed, strategic decisions about how and where we must push back against them — the answer is not everywhere and always. Moscow, like Washington, wants to be the dominant power in the region. Weapons shipments to Kiev, in the view of the Kremlin, are a hostile act designed to jeopardize Moscow’s national security and pressure Russia. To the extent that this view continues to prevail, the Kremlin will react forcefully and retaliate. This fundamental truth must factor into Washington’s decision-making. At its heart, international politics is about strategic competition between states. It is a cutthroat game that forces all countries, including the United States, to make wise, informed decisions about which battles are in the national interest to fight and which are left for the region itself to manage. Picking a fight with a declining, nuclear power over Ukraine is the exact opposite of wise; remember, Ukraine is not an ally. Russia has so much more at stake in the outcome than the U.S., so the former will always be more willing to make the necessary sacrifices to achieve its desired political end state. In many respects, the Trump administration’s decision to send anti-tank missiles to Kiev is a perfect example of Washington’s reactionary, rather than strategic, foreign policy. Sometimes it is appropriate for the United States to respond harshly to Russian behavior, notably when the malignant behavior conflicts with our vital interests — our security, prosperity and our republic. When no vital interests are at stake, however, it is more appropriate to collaborate with Moscow in an attempt to resolve a dispute diplomatically. And in still other areas — strategic arms control, for instance — the U.S. and Russia have a responsibility to work together in order to promote mutual understanding between the two nations. The bipartisan foreign policy establishment in Washington ought to adopt a page out of the realist textbook: Intervening in peripheral conflicts that are separate from America’s core national security interests is a drain on America’s limited resources and a dangerous step toward unnecessary confrontation. It’s past time to start taking advice from those who counsel more restraint in national security decision-making.
The National Security Council is reported to be on the verge of recommending the export of $47 million worth of defensive arms to Ukraine. The package will reportedly include a cache of Javelin anti-tank missiles, weapons that would reliably and efficiently disable the hundreds of tanks that the Russian-supported separatists in the country’s east have acquired since the conflict began. Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko attends a medal ceremony for servicemen of the 72nd mechanized brigade in the government-held town of Avdiyivka, Ukraine October 22, 2017. Mykola Lazarenko/Ukrainian Presidential Press Service/Handout via REUTERS To advocates who believe that sending weapons to the Ukrainian government will bloody Russia’s nose and send President Vladimir Putin a message, this pending decision couldn’t have come soon enough. Arming Kiev is a popular prescription supported by top military officers and many lawmakers in both parties. Popular, however, doesn’t mean smart. Opening up America’s stockpile to Ukraine is not in Washington’s national security interest. In fact, it is bound to make a conflict that is mostly frozen into a more deadly one and it complicates any reasonable chance of a diplomatic resolution. MORE FROM REUTERS COMMENTARY John Lloyd: What Merkel's political woes mean for EU Mohamad Bazzi: How Saudi Arabia has overreached on Iran, Lebanon While it may be uncomfortable to admit, the political orientation of Ukraine and how Ukrainians choose to manage (or mismanage) their economy and political system doesn’t directly affect the United States. As Rajan Menon and William Ruger wrote in Foreign Affairs magazine last month, “Ukraine matters more to Russia than it does to the United States.” To Washington, Ukraine is a post-Soviet state whose oligarchic politics and systemic corruption have severely handicapped the country’s economic outlook. U.S. security interests in Europe are not wedded to whether Kiev succeeds in establishing a more democratic and accountable form of government. At best, Ukraine is a peripheral country that the United States doesn’t have a treaty obligation to defend if its territory is invaded. To Putin, however, Ukraine is an integral puzzle in his grand strategy of making Russia as relevant a global player as it was during the Cold War. A wholesale Westernization of Ukrainian politics, from associations with the European Union (EU) to a possible membership in NATO, would destroy that ambition and ruin a significant portion of Putin’s political legacy. Indeed, the possibility of Ukraine increasing its trade relationship and political direction with the United States and Europe was enough of a national security threat to Putin that he was willing to deploy Russian soldiers, paratroopers, and special forces on Ukrainian territory to carve out a zone of influence there. Putin’s belief that a Russian-friendly Ukraine is a national security imperative for Moscow won’t be changed by a couple dozen anti-tank missiles from the United States. The second concern for the Trump administration is how Putin might respond to any escalation. As former National Security Council official Charles Kupchan argued in the Washington Post: “The notion that Russian President Vladimir Putin would give up his hold on Donbass [Eastern Ukraine] if a few more Russians come home in body bags is to dramatically misread the Kremlin.” Yet this false assumption is what undergirds the arguments from proponents of lethal assistance to the Ukrainians. After Islamic State From new alliances to shifting Sunni-Shi’ite relationships, Reuters columnists examine how the fall of Islamic State could reshape the Middle East It’s impossible to understand why some U.S. legislators are so confident that Moscow will react in the way they expect. The three-and-a-half year long war has shown that Russia is ruthless in escalating its involvement and investment in the conflict to prevent a military victory for Kiev. In fact, to expect that Moscow would respond to more Russian casualties by suing for a peace settlement is to ignore completely how Putin has behaved since Russia’s 2014 invasion of Ukraine. When separatist units in Donetsk and Luhansk were losing ground to pro-Kiev forces early in the war, Russia came to their rescue. In the summer of 2014, when pro-Ukrainian troops were retaking towns that Kiev previously lost, columns of Russian tanks, artillery, heavy weapons, and soldiers crossed the border into Ukraine to ensure that there were no more Ukrainian territorial advances in strategic areas. When the stalemated battle in the city of Ilovaisk was slowly moving Kiev’s way, conventional Russian soldiers and weapons were fast-tracked to the frontline in what would turn out to be one of the deadliest days for Ukrainian troops in the war. Months later, when the separatists were in jeopardy of retreating from the strategic town of Delbatseve, Russian tanks were deployed and quickly forced an undermanned, disorganized, demoralized, and tired contingent of Kiev forces to withdraw. There’s no reason to think that Putin would respond less violently now if Washington sent defense shipments to Ukraine. The most negative impact of additional U.S. involvement is that it will likely spoil Moscow’s willingness to cooperate on a Ukrainian peacekeeping proposal. While Moscow has insisted that the 2014 and 2015 Minsk protocols are the only way the war in Ukraine can end peacefully, Putin has openly acknowledged that there may need to be greater international involvement if that peace is to be sustainable. He broached the subject of deploying U.N. troops along the contact line this September and even agreed to explore greater access to peacekeepers in separatist-controlled territory after a call with German Chancellor Angela Merkel. The concept is now being discussed within the Trump administration and between the U.S. and Russian special envoys to the conflict, suggesting sincerity on the Russian side. A White House authorization to send equipment to Kiev could stop that dialogue. It’s difficult to understand why the United States would escalate the war when there may finally be an opening to explore a U.N.-enforced cessation of hostilities that could lead to a political settlement to the conflict. Slideshow (2 Images) The Russians could respond to increased U.S. involvement in Ukraine in other ways too. Moscow could, for example, use its veto power in the U.N. Security Council to block U.S.-led efforts to stop North Korea’s nuclear program. Putin could expand military and intelligence cooperation with Iran to undermine the Trump administration’s policy of containing Iranian expansionism. The costs to the U.S. of turning Ukraine into a proxy war against Russia overshadow the benefit of increasing Moscow’s casualty count. Sending arms to Kiev will do very little to help resolve the conflict. Sometimes the best course of action for the White House is not to get more involved on issues peripheral to American grand strategy.
What’s more, Ukraine is no slouch in building weapons. Ukroboronprom, the state weapons manufacturer, employs 80,000 people and oversees 21 affiliates, and there are some 36 private Ukrainian defense firms besides. Ukraine makes advanced tanks, armored amphibious vehicles, aerial refueling tankers, transport aircraft, laser-guided anti-tank missiles (which get top billing in proposals to arm Ukraine, never mind that Ukraine makes the Corsar and Stugna-P laser-guided ATGMs), and long-range early-warning radars. Moreover, Ukraine was the world’s ninth-largest arms exporter from 2012 to 2016. It earned over $500 million selling arms last year and a total of $11 billion since it became an independent country. In short, the clamor to arm Ukraine may have less to do with its dire need for weapons than with drawing the United States deeper into the conflict.
Crimea will never be returned to the Ukraine, but NATO may be able to help the Ukraine regain sovereignty over its war torn eastern provinces by encouraging Kiev to cooperate with Moscow. Additionally, the US should discontinue its plans to expand its missile defence shield in Europe. This is a misguided policy that incentivises Russia to increase its reliance on tactical nuclear weapons and risks sparking another nuclear arms race. Paradoxically, Europe is safer without the shield. Finally, NATO should propose a replacement to the CFE treaty and guarantee that its nuclear arsenal will move no closer to Russia’s borders. In return for these assurances, Russia may be willing to downsize its nuclear armoury in Kaliningrad or even make concessions on the status of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. With neither side having shown much interest in diplomacy so far, it is hard to know how much can be achieved through negotiation. But the dangers entailed by the current standoff are alarming. Russia and NATO control the overwhelming majority of the world’s nuclear weapons and whilst the likelihood of an all-out war is low, this risk cannot be ignored. Russia and NATO are never going to see eye to eye on some issues, but tensions cannot be allowed to escalate any further. Western leaders are loath to make any concessions to Russia, but peace can only be re-established in Eastern Europe through compromise.
By contrast, the "spiral model" applies when a state's seemingly aggressive policy is motivated primarily by fear or insecurity. Making threats and trying to deter or coerce them will only reinforce their fears and make them even more aggressive, in effect triggering an action-reaction spiral of growing hostility. When insecurity is the taproot of a state's revisionist actions, making threats just makes the situation worse. When the "spiral model" applies, the proper response is a diplomatic process of accommodation and appeasement (yes, appeasement) to allay the insecure state's concerns. Such efforts do not require giving an opponent everything it might want or removing every one of its worries, but it does require a serious effort to address the insecurities that are motivating the other side's objectionable behavior.... Those who now favor arming Ukraine clearly believe the "deterrence model" is the right way to think about this problem. In this view, Vladimir Putin is a relentless aggressor who is trying to recreate something akin to the old Soviet empire, and thus not confronting him over Ukraine will lead him to take aggressive actions elsewhere. The only thing to do, therefore, is increase the costs until Russia backs down and leaves Ukraine free to pursue its own foreign policy. This is precisely the course of action the report from the three think tanks recommends: in addition to "bolstering deterrence," its authors believe arming Ukraine will help "produce conditions in which Moscow decides to negotiate a genuine settlement that allows Ukraine to reestablish full sovereignty." In addition to bolstering deterrence, in short, giving arms to Kiev is intended to coerce Moscow into doing what we want. Yet the evidence in this case suggests the spiral model is far more applicable. Russia is not an ambitious rising power like Nazi Germany or contemporary China; it is an aging, depopulating, and declining great power trying to cling to whatever international influence it still possesses and preserve a modest sphere of influence near its borders, so that stronger states — and especially the United States — cannot take advantage of its growing vulnerabilities. Putin & Co. are also genuinely worried about America's efforts to promote "regime change" around the world — including Ukraine — a policy that could eventually threaten their own positions. It is lingering fear, rather than relentless ambition, that underpins Russia's response in Ukraine. Moreover, the Ukraine crisis did not begin with a bold Russian move or even a series of illegitimate Russian demands; it began when the United States and European Union tried to move Ukraine out of Russia's orbit and into the West's sphere of influence. That objective may be desirable in the abstract, but Moscow made it abundantly clear it would fight this process tooth and nail. U.S. leaders blithely ignored these warnings — which clearly stemmed from Russian insecurity rather than territorial greed — and not surprisingly they have been blindsided by Moscow's reaction. The failure of U.S. diplomats to anticipate Putin's heavy-handed response was an act of remarkable diplomatic incompetence, and one can only wonder why the individuals who helped produce this train wreck still have their jobs. If we are in a "spiral model" situation, arming Ukraine will only make things worse. It certainly will not enable Ukraine to defeat the far stronger Russian army; it will simply intensify the conflict and add to the suffering of the Ukrainian people.
At a summit in Bucharest in April 2008, NATO released a statement affirming that Georgia and the Ukraine would be offered membership. US pressure was the chief driver of this decision, as several Western European alliance members expressed opposition to the plan. This was NATO’s most threatening and provocative move towards Russia yet. Ukraine, as the biggest country is Europe, constitutes an important strategic buffer between Russia and NATO. Napoleonic France, Wilhelmine Germany, and Nazi Germany all invaded Russia through south-eastern Europe and consequently, the Kremlin is extremely reticent to allow the armies of those countries to once again be stationed there. Georgia borders Russia’s volatile Caucasus region, already rife with minority nationalism and secessionist sentiment. Furthermore, both Georgia and the Ukraine are proximate to Russia’s Volga region, its agricultural heartland and its access point for Caspian Sea oil. The Kremlin cannot and will not risk its control over these assets being compromised. Russia and NATO: Where to Next? Winston Churchill once famously remarked that Russia is, “a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma.” However, since the end of the Cold War at least, the Russian mindset has been remarkably easy to understand. Russia regards NATO, the world’s most powerful military alliance, as a dire threat the its security. Russia’s goal of trying to halt NATO’s eastward march is rooted in a defensive realist view of international politics. The Kremlin is attempting to safeguard its security; it is not looking to reclaim lost status or recapture an empire. Analysts such as Derk Eppink have contended that, “Putin’s mind-set is largely rooted in the 19th century. Politics [for him] is about power.” Those who dismiss this worldview as outdated would do well to remember that Russia was almost destroyed twice in twentieth century by invasions through Eastern Europe. At least twenty-seven million Russians were killed during WWII, roughly one third of the war’s overall death toll. It should hardly be surprising that a sense of vulnerability still pervades Russian strategic thinking today. It is also worth noting that the US’ worldview is not significantly different to that of Russia. The US has pursued the Monroe Doctrine for almost two centuries, often employing violence and subverting democracy to prevent foreign powers from establishing a presence in the Americas. As John Mearsheimer explains, “this is Geopolitics 101: great powers are always sensitive to potential threats near their home territory… Imagine the American outrage if China built an impressive military alliance and tried to include Canada and Mexico.”
RUSSIA’S INTERNATIONAL ACTIONS OVER THE PAST 25 YEARS SHOULD not necessarily be seen as strategic. Integration into global—in essence, Western—institutions was the ultimate goal; however, Moscow invested in relationship-building efforts that did not reflect these ideas or, indeed, point to any coherent agenda. In the Yel’tsin era, Russia’s foreign policy was reactive and chaotic; in the Putin period, the strategic vision has become better developed. Putin’s famous Munich speech (Putin 2007) signified a shift in Moscow’s foreign policy (Sakwa 2008b, pp. 363–91; Tsygankov 2016). Moreover, the 2014 crisis in Ukraine brought greater consistency to Moscow’s approach, which has become more strategic, mixing different elements in pursuit of foreign policy objectives (Monaghan 2017). The Russian elites came to the realisation that integration into the Western world on their terms was not possible and that Moscow had to follow its own path, seeking to adapt the rules in its favour (Surkov 2018). Thus, Russia ‘wishes to be co-creator with the West of a normative order’ (Kuhrt & Feklyunina 2017, p. 41). Moscow remains an anti-revisionist power beyond the Ukrainian case and continues to act as a status quo power in Europe and other regions. In reference to the ‘power transition theory’, which categorises power as status quo or revisionist (Organski 1958; Sergunin & Karabeshkin 2015, pp. 350–51), Russia is a third type of a reformist power, one that does not want to radically change existing international rules, but aspires to reform and adapt them, making them more adequate to the permanently changing international environment. A sign of this is Russia’s increasing use of international norms as legalistic foreign policy tools to justify actions that suit Russian strategic interests Much of the earlier post-Soviet period was characterised by Russia’s attempts to build an environment conducive to its own domestic development and secure the neighbourhood on its Western flank. However, these policies were inconsistent, a series of reactions to moves by the European Union (EU) and to the political trajectories taken by the states in the Russia–EU buffer zone. Since the Ukraine crisis, Russia has been adapting its strategies to a climate of hostile international relations (Monaghan 2016a), devising a composite range of policies, including enhanced support to political allies, imposition of sanctions upon opponents, targeted investments in social capital and the development of narratives justifying Russia’s position. The essay discusses how Russia’s power manifested itself in relation to policies pursued by Western actors in the neighbourhood of the western Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), namely, Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus. It focuses on how Russia understands power, the way this specific understanding impacted the ideational and cultural influence that it projects, and how Moscow applies a range of tools in its western neighbourhood. This essay concentrates on the aftermath of the Ukraine crisis and how Russia’s power has been reconfigured, showing that the power equation has been shaped by Russia’s interactions with the West and driven by what Russia thinks the West is doing vis-à-vis Russia and its allies (Filimonov 2017). The region is important because, despite recent upheavals, Russia still holds many assets, some of which were derived from the Soviet legacy and some that have been acquired following the emergence of modern Russia. It is the region where Russia clashes with the EU in their contested neighbourhood while the ‘Russian World’ (Russkii Mir) identity has been invoked in its two conflicts, Transnistria and Donbas. This region is also an economic corridor between Russia and the West. Given that hard security is already a well-researched subject (Monaghan 2015, 2017; Renz 2016), this essay grants particular relevance to non-military aspects of power projection. The term ‘power’ has been seldom used by the Russian political establishment outside the military domain; the preferred form of words has been to speak about ‘influence’ in global and regional affairs.1 Russia’s understanding of power rests on several key assumptions and demonstrates continuity with its historical tradition of state power projection (Pomper 2012). Security is the priority consideration and the permanence of conflicts is to be expected (Monaghan 2017): a state is powerful if it can successfully confront internal and external threats. In this paradigm, Belarus is a powerful state while Ukraine is not. Russia’s ultimate aim is stability on its borders; control is seen as a guarantee of achieving stability, by political means if possible, and by the military ones if necessary. Moscow’s advantage is that it is prepared to act quickly and decisively, backed up by consensus at home. An interplay of domestic and international factors can be observed in interpreting the sources of power that lie in: first, performance-based domestic legitimacy presented as ‘effectiveness’ (Lipset 1981, p. 83), one of the pillars of the Russian development model; second, pragmatic conservatism presented as a straightforward, that is, an accessible ideology of ‘common sense’ (Laruelle 2013); third, a change from defensive reaction to proactive engagement in foreign policy; and, last, capitalising on security deployment related to the former. Rather than society, it is the state that represents a key source for Russia’s power, and the main engine of policy formulation and implementation (Monaghan 2017). State strength is an important commodity in the ability to project power. Zakaria (1997) measured the relative strength of a state along several dimensions: the degree of cohesion in central institutions (particularly the civil bureaucracy and the military); the degree of autonomy from society; the ability to generate revenue; and the scope of governmental responsibilities. Strong states, such as Russia, have higher scores in each of these dimensions. Weaker states, by contrast, suffer from fragmentation, penetration by interest groups, lack of revenue, and have minimal responsibilities towards their citizens. ‘State power—the relative ability of the state to extract and mobilise resources from domestic society—shapes the types of internal balancing strategies that countries are likely to pursue. State power, in turn, is a function of the institutions of the state, as well as of nationalism and ideology’ (Taliaferro 2006, p. 464). Western media and policy discourse tend to deny Russia’s internal strength and are inclined to interpret its actions as motivated by weakness,2 even though various scholars challenged this premise (Monaghan 2016a). The argument is misplaced. Russia has many problems, but its domestic order does not seriously constrain the pursuit of foreign policy objectives that the leadership considers important. Christensen (1996) developed the concept of national political power, which he defined as ‘the ability of state leaders to mobilise their nation’s human and material resources behind security policy initiatives’. In this view, states should have sufficient institutional strength to ensure their citizens contribute to state initiatives either through coercion or voluntary compliance. For Russia, power primarily lies in the sovereignty of a nation-state and its ability to defend this sovereignty. At the same time, Russia presents itself as upholding the rules-based international normative regime. Foreign policy does not unfold in a context of complete international anarchy, in which no legal authority exists, and in most cases, Russia abides by the rules. These notions and assumptions about the projection of power as a means of enhancing sovereignty became evident in Russia’s approach to Ukraine and put Russia on a collision course with the West. In an exceptional case, state behaviour at the international level can be broken, especially if the value of the expected outcome is sufficiently high (Morgenthau 1958; Buzan 1996, pp. 50–4). In peaceful conditions, society plays a modest role; in times of turbulence, such as during the Crimea and Donbas crises, it signals to the ruling elite which direction it wishes it to take, as well as shows how far it expects the state to go. The state, however, is dependent on society’s willingness to provide material and moral resources for its foreign and security policies. A high degree of social cohesion allows states to pursue foreign policy initiatives. With regard to Crimea and the Donbas, the Russian case demonstrated that, despite various internal disagreements, society holds a largely uniform view on security and on the state’s role in providing it. This majority support underpinned the resilience that helped Russia to withstand the impact of Western sanctions as society was largely prepared to accept the price of the leadership’s actions abroad.3 Authorities and society converged on conservatism as an expression of a ‘social contract’, ‘due to the moral and political consolidation that occurred at the beginning of the second decade of the 21st century’ (Polyakov 2015, p. 5).This consolidation allowed the Russian elite to react with a virtually united front to the events in Ukraine (Polyakov 2015). These events, and the Russian leadership’s response to them changed the understanding of the national idea: while in 2004 it was based on economic performance, in 2015 patriotism became its key concept, successfully creating a different basis for legitimisation of the ruling regime (Feldmann & Mazepus 2017; Robertson & Greene 2017). Nevertheless, as Tsygankov argues, Russia had already experienced a surge in patriotism in 2013 due to the promotion of ‘the vision of Russia as a culturally distinct power, committed to defending particular values and principles relative to those of the West’ (Tsygankov 2015, p. 291) and not as a compensation for economic deterioration which happened a year later in 2014 when the Western sanctions on Russia were imposed (Tsygankov 2015).4 Enhanced social cohesion around an ideology is an essential ingredient for the state’s ability to project power; the Ukrainian crisis brought Russia the contours of an ideology that filled the vacuum of the Yel’tsin’s years. Taliaferro defines ‘ideology’ as a series of widely held beliefs, causal relationships, and assertions about the proper relationship of the state to domestic society and the role of the state in the international system across a range of issues— political, economic, social and military (Taliaferro 2006, p. 493). These beliefs have been developing in modern Russia since its emergence but they lay dormant and only manifested themselves under the pressure of a situation that triggered the state’s vital security concerns. Apart from their domestic function, they also feed into foreign policy. The ability to project power is also about the quality of leadership. The common approach is to concentrate on the personality of the omnipresent and omnipotent Vladimir Putin, who has allegedly turned the country into his fiefdom (Kotkin 2015). So-called ‘Putinology’ has become equated to ‘demonology’, a struggle of ‘good versus evil’ (Monaghan 2016a, pp. 46–50), in which Putin ‘remains arguably a bigger threat to Western stability than ISIS’ (Birrell 2015). The inability to see Russia beyond Putin reflects the failure, common within Western scholarly circles, to appreciate that although a different leader would have brought a different style, the fundamentals of the Russian ideological narrative are shared across the spectrum of the political elite. Rather, ‘Putin’ has become Russia’s brand and this brand is an image of power. Putin is ranked by Forbes as the most powerful man in the world,5 and is a significant improvement on drunken Yel’tsin and the geriatric Politburo. The ‘Putin factor’ matters in the situations when the ability to employ personality politics is an asset. The Russian president believes in the power of personal relations with other leaders. Personal judgment is a premise that he trusts (Sakwa 2008c).6 For example, relations with Viktor Yanukovych were never cordial, and after a short pause, Moscow was prepared to deal with Petro Poroshenko despite his support for the Euromaidan protests. By contrast, the 2015 crisis with Turkey over the shooting down of the Russian military jet turned out badly because Putin counted President Recep Erdogan among ‘friends’, and ‘friends’ do not down each other’s planes. The Russian retaliation was fierce, and involved a ferocious bombing campaign against Turkey’s proxy forces in Syria as well as trade and other measures.7 ‘We were cheated like common fools’ Throughout the post-Soviet era, interactions with the West shaped the context in which Russia’s power developed in an adversarial way. Russia’s legacy status as a superpower explains its frustration with the political parameters established by the West at a time when Moscow was weak: the West, in this sense, created the rules of a new world order under which Russia is constrained in the pursuit of its legitimate interests. As stated by former Russian diplomat Vladimir Pryakhin, ‘we thought we would be accorded a place in international affairs, [that of] France. When France intervenes in Mali, nobody lifts an eyebrow. Instead, we were award[ed] a [the] place of Estonia’.8 The expectation of an equal partnership with the West—and perhaps of shared identity and development path—based on the complementarity between Russian resources and Western technology, was therefore disappointed. Moscow found hard to accept the argument that the spread of liberal and democratic values was the driving motivation behind NATO enlargement. Russia’s policy evolved in a more combative way in response to the advancement by the Western powers through EU and NATO enlargement into what Russia perceived as the sphere of its cultural values and geopolitical interests, while the Western policymakers overlooked the importance of the cultural domain for Russia: ‘perspectives that emphasize rationally defined state interests are potentially misleading if they are not combined with analysis of mutually exclusive cultural claims’ (Tsygankov 2015, p. 295). The 1990s influenced the values of Russian politicians. A warning example was the case of former Yugoslavia, which persuaded Russian elites that Serbia’s defeat ought not to be repeated across the post-Soviet space. Defiance of the West then moved centre-stage. Russia concluded from its embittered interactions with the West that the latter was driven by hegemonic aspirations and expected therefore it to act this way. As Mearsheimer argued in his seminal The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, powerful incentives are created by the international system to look for opportunities to gain power at the expense of rivals, and it is too tempting not to take advantage of those situations, if benefits seemingly exceed the costs (Mearsheimer 2001). In such circumstances, great powers recognise that the best way to ensure security is to ‘achieve hegemony now’, and take steps against a possibility of a future deficit (Mearsheimer 2001, pp. 34–5). They require a surplus of power to cover uncertainties, possible miscalculations and future surprises, such as those encountered by Russia in the 1990s. The ultimate goal is to be the hegemon in the system and avoid the emergence of competitors, such as NATO and then the EU expanding into Russia’s immediate neighbourhood and sphere of influence. Sakwa (2015) points to the fundamental failure of the West to understand Russia’s motivations as a cause leading to the crisis in Western–Russia relations over Ukraine. The EU’s position was that its growing expansion, including the foreign and security dimension, did not constitute power projection. Friedman noted that ‘this might well have been the subjective intention of the Europeans, but the Russians saw that without buffers, a united Europe with a shifted intent might well pose an existential threat to Russia’ (Friedman 2015). In Nicu Popescu’s words, ‘EU eastern policy proved to be a policy with more or less explicit geopolitical consequences that was not designed to either really counter or withstand serious Russian opposition to it, nor, as an alternative, to accommodate Russia’ (Popescu 2014, p. 36). Russian thinking was anxious about the perceived policy of expansion and inclined to show its limitations, especially since the reasons for the expansions were unclear. In an absence of clarity over intentions, Moscow looked at capabilities. The contradiction arose between normative assertions and spatial advance when the EU entered the ‘shared neighbourhood’ and came up against a rival enterprise, that is, Russia: direct confrontation over space came hence to be framed by both sides in the language of norms (Sakwa 2017, pp. 12–4). Russia’s Foreign Policy Concept (December 2016) outlined a structural set of disagreements with the Western community in terms of how the world order is seen to uphold the set of norms Russia considers important (Monaghan 2016b).
Experts continue to discuss who exactly is to blame for the erosion and fragmentation of the current international order. Most experts in the West tend to blame Russia. It has been dubbed the world’s biggest revisionist and a destroyer of the foundations, which is, of course, an exaggeration. The West itself is staggering from domestic turmoil: elections produce unexpected results; military campaigns lead to defeat and regional crises on its borders threaten it with spillover of instability. In the end, discipline is dropping under the impact of external and internal drain in the Western Hemisphere while the former consensus on goals and values is being eroded without the participation of Russia. Indeed, anything that is not understood and not obvious is now explained by Russia’s activities. But let’s write this off as a misunderstanding. Instead, let’s answer the following question: is Russia essentially a revisionist in the global system? If the latter is understood as the Western centric system of liberal democracies, the answer is yes. Russia has never – not even in the early 1990s – fully considered this system global, legitimate and efficient. Moscow considered a different system to be truly global – a global system of multilateral regulation by sovereign states with reliance on the UN and international law. It is within this system that the security interests of all states, regardless of their domestic system, were recognized and respected, the principle of non-interference in a country’s domestic affairs was universal, while decision making on global issues was collective and a prerogative of the UN Security Council. In other words, in a multilateral, or to use the Russian term, polycentric world system it was necessary to consider Russia’s security interests during NATO’s expansion while unilateral actions like aggressive wars and invasions to support coups should be eliminated from international life. Signs of Russia’s consistent intention to rely on the said principles came from the first Russian governments. At the CSCE conference in Stockholm in 1992, then Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev staged a real demarche by delivering a stunning speech before Western foreign ministers and MPs to the effect that NATO expansion was unacceptable because it would compel Russia to take reciprocal steps. After some time Kozyrev returned to the podium and admitted that this was a deliberate provocation to show how his successor would speak if he failed to build a constructive system of relations with the West. Two years later Boris Yeltsin made his famous speech in Budapest about Cold Peace. He sounded similar to Kozyrev but his speech was a true political statement rather than a provocation. Demonising Russia and the Geopolitical Consequences As a consequence of Western misperception of Russia’s interests and potential power, Russia will develop its self-conception as an alternative civilisation to the West. Geo-politically, Russia’s growing alliance with China is an outcome of the West’s misguided hostility to Russia – expressed in the expansion of NATO, the abrogation of nuclear arms agreements, support for extra-legal political regime change and a series of destabilising economic sanctions. It is possible to generalize that Russia’s vision of itself in international relations is rooted in its strategic experience and does not depend on international political cycles or the business environment. Russia’s historical problem is that it is not an island. For three centuries, Russia had to maintain the world’s largest national territory while remaining protected and militarily advanced. Its almost endless borders, its open East European flatlands and its numerous rivals turned Russia into one of the most active players in wars and diplomacy. This rich, diverse and often painful experience has turned the Russian elite into natural realists that find it difficult to believe in the power of ideas and who rely more on pragmatic forecasts. The foundations of Russian doctrine are rooted in the conviction that states are the leading players in international relations and compete against each other under conditions of anarchy; that their key resource is sovereignty and that conflicts between them are normal. Human nature is imperfect and the character of a state regime is unimportant for constructive international relations. What, in Russia’s opinion, is the guarantee of stability in international relations? It should rest on common rules of conduct fixed in international law that is supported by a balance of forces between the participants in the system. If Russia’s vision of international relations is expressed as a metaphor, it would be the image of Atlases who carry the heavens on their shoulders with each Atlas representing a separate great power. Their common task is to keep the heavens intact but when they try to compete, the heavens collapse. In this system the United States is a leading Atlas who carries the heaviest part of the heavens. However, this metaphor is static – any changes in this system must be endorsed by all key Atlases. And, of course, this metaphor rules out a linear development logic: the views of the Atlases do not matter if they support the heavens. Global Peace: Why a Major War Is Impossible in Modern International Relations Despite growing signs of military preparations under way in leading world countries, there is every reason to believe that a major war is impossible in modern international relations, as is evidenced, inter alia, by the recent Indian-Pakistani war crisis that involved an exchange of air strikes and took a toll of several hundred lives. So, is Russia a revisionist? Faced with a choice between unilateral and collective actions it most often calls for cooperation and talks. It chooses a pragmatic attitude over ideology-driven policy. It favors global stability over military supremacy. In other words, its behavior is contrary to the conduct of those who accuse it of revisionism. Russia is not a global revisionist. It is possible to say that its strategic experience makes it a calm observer of experiments launched by more active and truly revisionist states. Russia is convinced that revisionists lack strategic experience and are concurrently accumulating it in the course of multiple and politically unsuccessful military operations over the past few decades. Naturally, Russia will not remain idle if its security interests are impinged upon. It will react to aggressive moves by other states, which threaten these interests. Although Moscow will be accused of revisionism in these episodes, the opposite seems more logical. Protecting its interests, Russia is upholding the world order based on sovereignty and a mutual consideration of interests.
John Mearsheimer, the international relations scholar, argues Russia’s aggressiveness towards its neighbors stems from western efforts to extend NATO membership to former members of the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe and the Balkans. According to this view, traditional national interest drives Russia’s behavior, and NATO extension has been seen by Putin as a threat to Russia’s vital national security interests. From this perspective, the western democracies helped create Vladimir Putin’s Russia by impinging on its “sphere of influence” along its borders; thus, Russia is not what international relations scholars call a “revisionist power”—one which seeks to overthrow the existing international order—but a traditional state protecting what it sees as its equities and vital national interests. Other analysts, such as Anne Applebaum, argue Putin’s policies are not part of a grand strategy, but are evidence of an improvised foreign policy. Thus, Russia’s aggression in Georgia, Ukraine, Syria, and its threats to the Baltic States, may be seen not as a carefully designed and executed strategy of conquest, but as symptomatic of Putin’s ad hoc, opportunistic foreign policy. He probes for Western weakness, irresolution, and indecision, and then, if there is no resistance, he intervenes to extend Russia’s reach by absorbing more territory. Putin has sought to return Russia to great power status by weakening other competing powers or annexing neighboring states rather than risking reforms that could be destabilizing in the short term, but would strengthen Russia as a nation state over the long term. The immediate objectives of Russian foreign policy are not mysterious if one examines Putin’s government’s public rhetoric, its published documents, and its actions. One of Putin’s greatest strengths has been the aggressive and systematic pursuit of these strategic objectives which include: efforts to regain military parity with the United States (they are nowhere near achieving this) the neutralization of the NATO alliance the end of the European Union as one of the most powerful economic blocs in the world the creation of an alternative anti-liberal, authoritarian, reactionary governance model of statehood for which Russia is trying to gain adherents among far right and far left parties wing in Europe the reconstruction of the historic Russian sphere of influence through annexation of parts of neighboring states and the projection of Russian power to other regions of the world such as the Middle East and Afghanistan If Putin’s strategic objective was to minimize or reduce external threats to Russia, the invasion of Ukraine was a major strategic blunder as it has slowly begun to mobilize the previous docile and distracted Western Alliance to counter the new threat. NATO officials have now begun publicly raising the alarm bells. Sweden and Finland, which never joined NATO, are now engaged in a public discussion about joining the Alliance, which has broad public support. Putin’s Grand Bargain with the Russian People: Surren
When historians examine the first few decades of the so-called post-Cold War era, they are likely to marvel at the clumsy and provocative policies that the United States and its NATO allies pursued toward Russia. Perceptive historians will conclude that a multitude of insensitive actions by those governments poisoned relations with Moscow, and by the latter years of the Obama administration, led to the onset of a new cold war. During the Trump administration, matters grew even worse, and that cold war threatened to turn hot. Since the history of our era is still being written, we have an opportunity to avoid such a cataclysmic outcome. However, the behavior of America’s political, policy, and media elites in response to the latest parochial quarrel between Russia and Ukraine regarding the Kerch Strait suggests that they learned nothing from their previous blunders. Worse, they seem determined to intensify an already counterproductive, hardline policy toward Moscow. U.S. leaders managed to get relations with Russia wrong just a few years after the dissolution of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991. One of the few officials to capture the nature of the West’s bungling and how it fomented tensions was Robert Gates, who served as secretary of defense during the final years of George W. Bush’s administration and the first years of Barack Obama’s. In his surprisingly candid memoirs, Duty: Memoirs of a Secretary at War, Gates recalls his report to Bush following the 2007 Munich Security Council, at which Russian President Vladimir Putin vented about Western security transgressions, including the planned deployment of a missile defense system in Central Europe. “When I reported to the president my take on the Munich conference, I shared my belief that from 1993 onward, the West, and particularly the United States, had badly underestimated the magnitude of the Russian humiliation in losing the Cold War . . . .” Yet even that blunt assessment given to Bush did not fully capture Gates’s views on the issue. “What I didn’t tell the president was that I believed the relationship with Russia had been badly mismanaged after [George H. W.] Bush left office in 1993. Getting Gorbachev to acquiesce to a unified Germany as a member of NATO had been a huge accomplishment. But moving so quickly after the collapse of the Soviet Union to incorporate so many of its formerly subjugated states into NATO was a mistake.” Specific U.S. actions were ill-considered as well, in Gates’s view. “U.S. agreements with the Romanian and Bulgarian governments to rotate troops through bases in those countries was a needless provocation.” His list of foolish or arrogant Western actions went on. Citing NATO’s military interventions in Bosnia and Kosovo during Bill Clinton’s administration, Gates noted that “the Russians had long historical ties with Serbia, which we largely ignored.” And in an implicit rebuke to his current boss, Gates asserted that “trying to bring Georgia and Ukraine into NATO was truly overreaching.” That move was a case of “recklessly ignoring what the Russians considered their own vital national interests.” Indeed, events regarding Ukraine after Gates completed his memoirs illustrated that U.S. arrogance and meddling knew few bounds. U.S. officials openly sided with demonstrators who overthrew Ukraine’s elected, pro-Russian government, and then reacted with shock and anger when Russia retaliated by seizing and annexing Crimea. Gates’s overall assessment of Western, especially U.S., policy toward Russia during the post-Cold War era was unsparingly harsh—and devastatingly accurate: “When Russia was weak in the 1990s and beyond, we did not take Russian interests seriously. We did a poor job of seeing the world from their point of view and managing the relationship for the long term.” Unfortunately, Gates was one of the rare anomalies in the American foreign policy community regarding policy toward Russia. His criticism, trenchant as it is, still understates the folly of the policies that the United States and its NATO allies have pursued toward Moscow. The treatment that three successive U.S. administrations meted out to a newly capitalist, democratic Russia was appalling myopic. Even before Vladimir Putin came to power—and long before Russia descended into being an illiberal democracy and then an outright authoritarian state—the Western powers treated the country as a de facto enemy. The NATO nations engaged in a series of provocations even though Moscow had engaged in no aggressive conduct that even arguably justified such actions. When Washington Assured Russia NATO Would Not Expand Making Sure the Next Cold War Never Happens The determination to confront Russia has only grown over the years, as the current tensions involving the Kerch Strait illustrate. When Russian security forces fired on three Ukrainian naval vessels that attempted to force a transit of the Kerch Strait (a narrow waterway between Russia’s Taman Peninsula and Russian-annexed Crimea that connects the Black Sea and Sea of Azov), the United States and its NATO allies reacted furiously. U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley branded Russia’s conduct “outlaw actions.” An array of U.S. lawmakers and pundits advocate highly provocative steps in response. Rep. Eliot Engel (D-NY) the incoming chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, urged an increase in U.S. arms sales to Ukraine, asserting, “If Putin starts seeing Russian soldier fatalities, that changes his equation.” Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman James Inhofe (R-OK) threatened new sanctions on Russia and called for a coordinated response between the United States and its European allies. “If Putin continues his Black Sea bullying,” Inhofe stated, “the United States and Europe must consider imposing additional sanctions on Russia, inserting a greater U.S. and NATO presence in the Black Sea region and increasing military assistance for Ukraine.” Sen. Robert Menendez (D-NJ) echoed those views. Menendez called for tougher sanctions, additional NATO exercises on the Black Sea and more U.S. security aid to Ukraine, “including lethal maritime equipment and weapons.” Some hawks even seem receptive to Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko’s call on NATO to station warships in the Sea of Azov, even though such a step would likely lead to a shooting war between the West and Russia. Far too many Western (especially American) analyses explicitly or implicitly act as though the United States and its NATO allies worked assiduously to establish cordial relations with Russia but were compelled to adopt hardline policies solely because of Russia’s perversely aggressive conduct. That is a distorted, self-serving portrayal on the part of NATO partisans. It falsely portrays the West as purely a reactive player—that NATO initiatives were never insensitive, provocative, or aggressive. Nothing could be further from the truth. Indeed, the opposite is closer to the mark; Russia’s actions, both in terms of timing and virulence, tended to be responses to aggressive Western initiatives. Unfortunately, avid NATO supporters seem determined to double down, insisting that the Trump administration adopt even more uncompromising policies. Contending that Moscow is to blame for the deterioration of East-West relations because of its military actions in Georgia and Ukraine, as U.S. opinion leaders tend to do, is especially inaccurate. The problems began much earlier than the events in 2008 and 2014. The West humiliated a defeated adversary that showed every sign of wanting to become part of a broader Western community. Expanding NATO and trampling on Russian interests in the Balkans were momentous early measures that torpedoed friendly relations. Such policy myopia was reminiscent of how the victorious Allies inflicted harsh treatment on a defeated, newly democratic Weimar Germany after World War I. The NATO powers are treating Russia as an enemy, and there is now a serious danger that the country is turning into one. That development would be an especially tragic case of a self-fulfilling prophecy.
History The Cato Institute is an American libertarian think tank that is headquartered in Washington, D.C. It was founded as the Charles Koch Foundation in 1974 by Ed Crane, Murray Rothbard, and Charles Koch. In July 1976, the name was changed to the Cato Institute. The mission of the Cato Institute is to originate, disseminate, and increase understanding of public policies based on the principles of individual liberty, limited government, free markets, and peace. Funded by / Ownership The Cato Institute is a 501(c)(3) Non-profit think tank who’s current CEO and President is Peter N. Goettler. According to their about page “Cato receives approximately 80 percent of its funding through tax-deductible contributions from individuals, many of whom are responding to informative direct mail solicitations and program updates.” Cato offers an annual report that shows the percentages of money received as well as their IRS 990 form. The Cato institute is funded by a wide variety of organizations including Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation, Charles Koch Foundation and Sarah Scaife Foundation. Analysis / Bias In review, The Cato Institute is a right leaning Libertarian think thank that advocates for privatizing many aspects of Government, such as schools and social security. Cato is also opposed to Campaign Finance Reform and often is criticized for climate change denial. While Cato advocates for right wing economic policies, they support socially liberal positions such as Gay Marriage, Marijuana Legalization and liberalized immigration. Cato Institute uses moderately loaded language in their headlines and articles such as this: The Myth of the Cyber Offense: The Case for Restraint. This article, like most on Cato, is very well researched and sourced properly. However, on the side bar of the website they offer curated news from other sources that generally leans right such as the National Review and the factually mixed Federalist. Story selection typically revolves around limited government issues with a strong emphasis on free market capitalism. In the past Cato published misleading or false information regarding climate science. Here is Cato’s current position on Global Warming: “Global warming is indeed real, and human activity has been a contributor since 1975. But global warming is also a very complicated and difficult issue that can provoke very unwise policy in response to political pressure. Although there are many different legislative proposals for substantial reductions in carbon dioxide emissions, there is no operational or tested suite of technologies that can accomplish the goals of such legislation. Fortunately, and contrary to much of the rhetoric surrounding climate change, there is ample time to develop such technologies, which will require substantial capital investment by individuals.” This position has led to criticism. A factual search reveals that Cato has failed one fact check in regards to climate change. This failed fact check occurred in 2009. Since that time Cato has changed its position on climate change. Overall, we rate the Cato Institute Right-Center Biased. While Cato’s economic and environmental positions are strongly right, they also hold liberal positions through immigration and social liberty issues. In whole, this places them Right-Center as we weigh economic theory more heavily in the overall score. We also rate them High for factual reporting due to proper sourcing of information and recognizing the consensus of science. (7/12/2016) Updated (D. Van Zandt 5/10/2019)
Ukraine and Its New Friends While Ukraine has continued its daily confrontations with the forces of the Donetsk and Luhansk Regions and Russian forces along its littoral Black Sea and Sea of Azov coasts, the U.S. passed a $47 million U.S. military-aid package for 2018. The U.S. confirmed in March 2018 that it had delivered to Kyiv 210 Javelin anti-tank missiles and 37 Javelin launchers, as well as military trainers in their use and deployment. These had already had a marked effect on the deployment of tanks by Russia and the rebels. However, the Russian pressure on Ukraine has not ceased. In mid-December 2018, Russia moved military convoys north on the Simferopol-Armyansk highway toward the border between Kherson Oblast’ in Ukraine and Crimea. Later that month, Russian submarines of the Black Sea Fleet conducted drills in the Black Sea to practice covert movements while submerged. Russia also shifted fourteen Su-27 and Su-30 fighter jets to Belbek Airbase near Sevastopol. This was, presumably, to begin an assault on the Dnepr River canal which provided fresh water to the Crimea before the Ukrainians blocked it. The Russians built a bridge over the Kerch Strait to bring supplies to Crimea; an unsteady bridge which is not expected to last too long because of the seismic conditions in the Strait, but it is low enough to block many of the commercial vessels shipping goods to and from the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdiansk. The U.S. and EU have been pushing back against this attempt by Russia to strangle Ukraine economically, by sending vessels and missile cruisers to the area. Yet, Russia hasn’t stopped its continued pressure on Ukraine. However, there is a new dimension to the power equation with the arrival of a large Chinese presence. China has increased its involvement in Ukraine, using development assistance through its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) as a rationale for its efforts. China’s main goal is economic benefits for itself and as a foil for the brake on Russian aggression which would threaten the BRI. China is strengthening its position in Eastern Europe to gain an advantage in its relations with Russia, the EU and the U.S. For China, Ukraine is an important BRI partner. For Ukraine, China is its main Asian economic partner. In 2011, the countries signed a strategic partnership. By January 2015, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Chinese leader Xi Jinping discussed increasing cooperation during the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. In September 2017, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Pawlo Klimkin, paid a visit to China, and then last December, Ma Kai, China’s vice premier, visited Kyiv. China’s activities in Ukraine are ideal for its BRI mostly because of Ukraine’s transit-state position and its free-trade agreement with the EU. One of the main elements of BRI is establishing new railway connections between China and Europe. In 2016, Ukraine launched a test of a new rail-ferry line transporting goods between the Black and Caspian seas, but using other connections that exclude Russian territory. [xi] Chinese investment has proved to be much less onerous than the strict rules of the EU and the Bretton Woods agencies which insist on managing “Ukrainian corruption”. China aggressively competes with Ukraine’s Western partners for a strong foothold in this important frontier economy, often with much less restrictions. Combined with free trade agreements with the EU and Canada (the EU has become Ukraine’s largest bilateral trading partner at 30 billion euros [$35 billion] per year), along with steady U.S. trade, Ukraine remains a highly attractive partner to China and Chinese companies. With Beijing having pledged at least $7 billion for major Ukrainian infrastructure projects, Chinese companies, which often come in under budget and complete large projects ahead of schedule, are now major competitors with Europe for big infrastructure projects. On the south-eastern Black Sea coast, the China Harbor Engineering company completed a $40 million dredging operation to give bigger ships access to Yuzhny port, while it’s been reported that ports in Odessa, Chornomorsk, and Izmail may also benefit. While Chinese companies tackle Ukrainian infrastructure projects such as coastal highways and roads built to withstand the burden of heavy, grain-laden trucks, others are investing in new grain silos and port elevators to help with transportation logistics. [xii] China clearly sees Ukraine as a special area of interest, both for its location and for its agricultural productivity. Along with direct access to the Danube River, the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, Ukraine also has 22,000 kilometres of interconnected railway to Europe. With bilateral trade between Ukraine and China now exceeding US$7.6 billion a year, Ukraine also supplies China with the bulk of its corn consumption. A major Chinese agricultural giant, Noble Agri, has two assets in Ukraine, a sunflower seed processing complex in Mariupol, and a grain facility and port terminal in Mykolaiv which boasts a capacity of 2.5 million tons per year and storage capacity of 125,000 tons. Ukraine is the only European country where Noble Agri has a presence, while it competes worldwide with US companies like Cargill, Monsanto, and Bunge.[xiii] At the moment there is no open conflict between China and Russia over Ukraine. However, it is clear that China does oppose any expanded military initiatives between Russia and Ukraine, especially those which may close down its ports and rail lines. China has essentially economic interests in Ukraine, interests which will disappear if hostilities break out between the two. China has grown to be a much more formidable military power than Russia. Its military history is one which demonstrates the growth in Chinese power. The most important conflict between the Russian military and President Putin may have arisen from Putin’s policy towards China. Putin’s administration has been making every effort to engage with China, by asking for assistance to join with Russia as a consumer of its energy exports, as well as a builder of pipelines, ports and railroads. This includes growing a financial partnership. These efforts have put President Putin in direct conflict with the Russian military, which views China as a strategic enemy. For decades there has been an intense competition between the two nations in their border regions, which at times has resulted in conflict and disputes over land. After a treaty was completed in November 1997 establishing the border between the two countries, and a 2004 Complementary Agreement returning some territory to China, relations have been strained since then as there is an increasing imbalance between the two sides; militarily, economically and in terms of manpower. Russia has a very serious problem with China. There are too few Russians in the regions of Khabarovsk and Primorsky Krai to match the Chinese. Russia is being depopulated at a prodigious rate with many of those who lived in Siberia and the Russian East (Dalnevostok) moving West to the cities across the Urals. There are not enough Russians to conduct the business that will need to be done on a project as vast as the extraction of oil, the building of a pipeline and the establishment of roads, ports and infrastructure in that region. Even Russians admit that this work will be performed by Chinese labourers. Russian companies do not have the manpower, the working capital, or the inclination to perform this infrastructural work. It has not improved with the continuing depopulation of the region. The dependence on Chinese manpower has had an important effect on Russia’s purported tilt towards China. Russian politicians may think it makes sense to shift focus to co-operation with China, but the Russian military has no such compulsions. Russia’s military has voiced concerns over its naval bases in Sovetskaya Gavan and Bolshoi Kamen not far away. Officials were surprised that President Putin appears more concerned about NATO (6,000 miles away) than about China, a nation with a population of billions that shares a border a quarter of a mile away across the Amur and the Ussuri Rivers. There are concerns that Russia would not be able to prevent a Chinese decision to take back some of its lost lands in the Russian Far East. This issue has been compounded by the current Chinese military and economic expansion in the Arctic and the growth of China’s military exports to the world of products derived from Russian designs, but improved upon by the Chinese. We are no longer bound by any limitations either on the range of our missiles, nor on their power – let the enemy know about it, too. We need high-precision missiles and we are not going to repeat the mistakes of the Budapest memorandum. -Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko The Ukrainian Response The most important aspect of the Ukrainian response to the advances by China is in its military-industrial complex negotiations with the Chinese. China is trying to buy or control the vast military capability of Ukraine, which was denied to Russia after its invasion of Ukraine. One key area of interest is helicopter manufacturing and Ukraine has the firm, Motor Sich, that is a world leader in building helicopter engines and other components, as well as turbine engines for warships. Ukraine and its Western partners are not willing to allow what many consider a national treasure to become Chinese owned. China, which has been buying components from Motor Sich since the 1990s, would greatly benefit from its trade secrets and key personnel. As long as Russia occupies Crimea and Donbas that business relationship remains blocked. On the other hand, Ukrainians feel a new door has been opened for them by the U.S. leaving the INF Treaty. In March 2019, President Petro Poroshenko said that Ukraine was no longer bound with some limits regarding missile range and that Ukraine would now seek to develop high-intermediate precision missiles. Ukraine has the technology and the tools for this already.[xiv] Poroshenko stated, “We are no longer bound by any limitations either on the range of our missiles, nor on their power – let the enemy know about it, too. We need high-precision missiles and we are not going to repeat the mistakes of the Budapest memorandum.” With the resurgence of Ukraine’s defence industries, the rise of a working relationship between Ukraine and China, and the increasing active participation of the U.S. in supplying Ukraine with increased lethality, there are limitations of Russia’s ability to project hard power against the Ukrainians. Regardless, in no way does this diminish or impede Russia’s cyber efforts, or the use of trolls, hackers and subterfuge to alter the political destiny of Ukraine or its ability to choose its leaders without undue interference. That is a battle which will continue in the near future.
The Russian Reliance on Ukrainian Military Technology One of the major difficulties of the Russian military stance towards Ukraine has been the fact that the most developed facilities for military production were located in Ukraine. The Russian Army had been starved of new equipment for over twenty years, and much of what it had available was built in Ukraine. Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “is the most advanced and developed branch of the state’s sector of economy.” [Ukraine Intelligence & Security Activities and Operations Handbook, Vol. 1: Strategic Information and Regulations; IBP, Inc., November 29, 2017]. There are about 85 scientific organizations specialized in the development of armaments and military equipment, along with an air and space complex, and research, design and development institutes to design and build modern ships and armaments for the Ukrainian Navy. This includes the ability to design and build heavy cruisers, missile cruisers and anti-submarine warfare (ASW) cruisers. Ukraine’s military industrial complex, in conjunction with numerous scientific research institutes and scientific-industrial corporations, has the capacity to develop and produce substantial small arms, communications and automated control systems, intelligence and radio-electronic warfare equipment, and engineer equipment and materiel. Perhaps the best example is the company Motor Sich. It has been the sole producer of engines for the MI-8 and MI-24 helicopters. It produced these engines for the Russian helicopter industry and a wide range of other military components. The air firm Antonov is based in Ukraine and is one of the major suppliers of aircraft for the Russian Air Force and for Russian arms exports. The ability of the Russian industry to fill its own needs is compounded by the fact that it needs Ukrainian parts and subassemblies for its exports and consumption. Losing control of the Eastern Ukraine has jeopardised Moscow’s ability to fulfill multibillion-dollar international contracts without Ukrainian inputs. Antonov also supplies the engines for the jointly-produced AN-148 planes. Ukraine and Russia had plans to produce 150 planes of this type worth $4.5 billion. Other exporters to Russia include Mykolayiv-based Zorya-Mashproekt, which sells several types of turbines to Russia, including those installed on military ships. Another is Kharkiv-based Haroun, which supplies the control systems for Russian missiles. The volume of Russian imports of major conventional weapons in 2009-2013 was 176 percent higher than for the previous five-year period of 2004-2008. The Yasumasa plant in Dnipropetrovsk is the only service provider for Satan missiles that Russia uses. The Ukrainians are also the main supplier of spare parts which its armed forces desperately need. Russia is scrambling to supply domestic factories with the technology needed to produce these components inside Russia. However, much of the higher inputs of technology, especially in the electromechanical area, are sourced in France, Germany, Britain and the U.S., now effectively closed off to Russia by sanctions. Despite efforts by Russian troops in the Eastern Ukraine, many of the existing plants were attacked and damaged by the rebels of Donetsk and Lugansk. Additionally, the skill set of the Russian factories has been degraded by the demographic crisis of Russia and an ageing population. Russia did not have the capacity to replicate the Ukrainian military-industrial complex inside the Russian borders overnight, despite its bluff and bluster to the contrary. When the Ukrainian government decreed that it was banning all military sales to Russia, it was a challenge to President Vladimir Putin and Russia’s generals. Where would they get the turbines for their ships, the missiles for their launchers, the transport aircraft for their soldiers, the engines for their helicopters, their spare parts, et al.? The Russian government tallied up the costs of modernizing its aging military forces equipment and concluded that it would total about $800 billion. Vladimir Putin had campaigned for the presidency by calling for a rejuvenated Russian military. He published an article in Rosicky Gazeta outlining the massive spending he was intending to pursue in building up the armed forces. Unfortunately, Russia didn’t have the money, and arms manufacturers were in no position to use the funds even if they got them, owing to their state of dereliction and the disappearance of skilled workers in the machine-tool industry. Not only was supply a problem, there were serious problems with quality. For example, Uralvagonzavod, the country’s only tank manufacturer is a good case. Putin himself bowed to army pressure to place an order for 2,300 tanks to be built over the next 10 years, despite a statement by General Staff head Nikolai Makarov that the military would not be purchasing any tanks in the next five years due to their substandard quality. In an article in RIA Novosti on 15 March 2012, Ground Forces Chief Col. Gen. Alexander Postnikov said that the most advanced weapon systems manufactured for Russia’s ground forces are below NATO, and even Chinese standards, and are expensive: “The weapon models that are manufactured by our industry, including armour, artillery and small arms and light weapons, fail to meet the standards that exist in NATO and even China.” He said that Russia’s most advanced tank, the T-90, was in fact a modification of the Soviet-era T-72 tank [entered production in 1971] but cost 118 million rubles (over $4 million) per unit. “It would be easier for us to buy three Leopards [Germany’s main battle tanks] with this money,” Postnikov said. Military modernisation was Russia’s key priority, but it was made infinitely more challenging by the loss of Ukrainian facilities, technology and skilled workers and, of course, international sanctions. President Putin has consistently promised more funds for this endeavour, but has been hampered by several key problems, some of which he cannot control. For years, Russia has been in the midst of a demographic crisis – and it might be getting worse. There was a 5.4% decline in the birth rate between 2017 and 2018. Up until last year, the population has been holding somewhat steady, but the low birth rate, coupled with low immigration, made 2018 the first year there was a population decline in absolute terms. Global tables of male life expectancy put Russia in about the 160th place, below Bangladesh. Russia has the highest rate of absolute population loss in the world. The Russian population is ageing, and Russia remains in the throes of a catastrophic demographic collapse. The population is expected to fall to 139 million by 2031 and could shrink 34 per cent to 107 million by 2050. Russia is suffering from a mass emigration of its populace, especially among the educated. According to the State Statistics Service (SSS), approximately 4.5 million people moved out of Russia between 1989 and 2014. The smallest outflow occurred in 2009 when just 32,500 people emigrated, but the numbers began rising again after 2011, and in 2014 once again reached 1995 levels. The situation has gotten significantly worse. “Russian government statistics show a sharp upturn in emigration over the last four years … Almost 123,000 officially departed in 2012, rising to 186,000 in 2013, and accelerating to almost 309,000 in 2014 after the annexation of Crimea and even more in 2015.” [viii] It isn’t only the educated and the young who are leaving Russia. Their money is leaving even faster. According to expert estimates, for all the years, about $ 3 trillion has been exported abroad. “The net outflow of private sector capital from Russia in January-February 2019 amounted to $ 18.6 billion, which is 2.1 times more than the figure for the same period last year – $ 8.7 billion”, the Russian Central Bank reports. According to Bloomberg’s estimates, over the past 25 years, about $ 750 billion have been taken out to offshore jurisdictions from Russia. Calculations of the MGIMO professor Valentin Katasonov show that about $ 3 trillion were withdrawn from the country since the collapse of the USSR.[ix] Bloomberg Economics calculations suggest some $750 billion in Russian assets moved offshore over the last 25 years. The bleeding appears to have slowed, though it’s unclear if this reflects tighter controls and mounting geopolitical risk, or if the flows have simply been getting harder to track.[x] The cost of the continuing war in Ukraine and the massive bleed of Russian military resources in Syria are also taking a heavy toll on the Russian budget. The cost of rebuilding Syria will make a heavy dent in Russia’s economic well-being. However, it has committed itself to a wide range of improvements in its military capabilities. This despite Russia’s lack of adequate shipyards, missile factories, available conscript manpower, essential electronic and guidance systems and subsystems blocked by sanctions. The burden of maintaining aged and decrepit equipment and an ever-expanding effort to extend its political reach into the Middle East, Africa and Latin America has increased dramatically. Much of this is the traditional Russian policy of bluff and bluster but, with the official burial of the INF Treaty, it is engaged in some expansion of its intermediate range missile systems. Some of these efforts towards greater capability appear to be directed against Ukraine as Russia is stepping up its threat level as Ukraine prepares for elections.
It is hard to judge from Russia’s point of view to what extent NATO’s anti-Russian propaganda reflects its real understanding of the situation. The hysteria in NATO countries surrounding the September 2017 Russian-Belarusian military exercises known as Zapad-2017 (West-2017) offers some food for thought. The intent to conduct these exercises was announced four years ago. As with any other preplanned exercises, they were little more than a ritual similar to prior exercises conducted in 2009 and 2013. Real-life exercises are only those that are conducted without warning, and over the past seven years Russia has conducted snap exercises on a much greater scale than Zapad-2017. Nobody ever expects that a long-scheduled exercise will serve as a cover to initiate real-life hostilities. Speculation about the threat of the Zapad exercises morphing into an attack against a neighboring state only illustrates how the boundary between analysis and propaganda or paranoia has eroded within NATO. A military confrontation between Russia and NATO can occur in only one scenario: if Russian and U.S. forces in Syria clash and the conflict escalates uncontrollably. A military conflict in Europe appears utterly unrealistic. Neither side has relevant combat experience or sufficient offensive capabilities; nor does either demonstrate any willingness to acquire such capabilities and deploy them for offensive operations. NATO countries are not psychologically prepared for war, and Russia has no real reason to start a war. Given these military realities, if one’s goal is to lower the tensions between NATO and Russia, one has to look to the political rather than the military sphere.
In fact, supplying arms is as much political as it is military. Sending weaponry is a signal of support and commitment. Just how committed the United States would be in the face of further Russian aggression is unclear, as there are few further actions to demonstrate support beyond becoming directly involved. But weapons also can be powerful bargaining chips. In any future negotiations, the United States could have pressured Russia by threatening to send Ukraine lethal weaponry. And the United States has likely lost any leverage to push Ukraine to make long-promised domestic changes, like fighting rampant corruption. [Ukrainians are protesting corruption — and using a new approach. Here’s how it works.] 4) How is Russia likely to respond? Russia retains escalation dominance in not only Ukraine but also the region. In simple terms, Moscow can deploy more troops faster than the West. One rationale during the Obama administration not to send lethal weapons was that the time to send, train and deploy the Javelins would pressure Russia to gamble even further and act to obtain key objectives, such as the port city of Mariupol. However, my research has demonstrated Russia’s main goal was to create a mechanism to influence Ukraine internally. Invading and occupying eastern Ukraine would extinguish that goal and leave Russia supporting another economically depressed region. This year is an election year, and the Kremlin can ill afford large numbers of its young conscripts returning in body bags. That is why Russia relied so heavily on proxy forces. Thus, an obvious recourse for Russia is to simply restart the fighting and use its proxy forces to inflict even more chaos and destruction on an already impoverished area.
Do ballistic missiles — nonnuclear ones — offer a deterrent? Ukraine could gain some deterrent capability from a ballistic missile with a range of 300 to 740 miles (500 to 1,200 kilometers), carrying a high-precision warhead with a high-explosive conventional payload and targeted at Russian military command centers, bases or critical infrastructure nodes. Of course, Ukraine’s nonnuclear missiles would be no match for Russia’s nuclear might, or its air and missile defenses. But with few options, Russia’s reported deployment of INF-range missiles and the need to defend its homeland, Ukraine would have high resolve, making its deterrent threat credible. The risk of even a single missile successfully reaching a Russian target from Ukraine, the country Russian propaganda has been dismissing as a failure, might force the Russian leadership to think twice before escalating the conflict. The high stakes of nuclear use, conversely, would diminish the credibility of Russia’s deterrent threat to counter Ukraine’s conventional attack with a nuclear response. A nuclear detonation on Ukrainian soil would have a serious impact on Russia’s population, as well as those of neighboring NATO countries. The Yuzhnoye facility, which survives by engaging in international space projects, would probably be more than willing to resume its missile-related work. Dnipro, Ukraine’s missile capital, has served as the logistical hub for the war in Donbas, organizing supplies, channeling manpower and pulling Russian-issue shrapnel from the wounded. Its citizens, including missile engineers, harbor no illusions regarding the Kremlin’s designs on their country.
Taras Chornovil, a Ukrainian political analyst and foreign relations expert, has said it is unlikely that a nuclear war may begin between the United States and the Russian Federation, as Moscow is technically weak. "Putin sees his every sortie he escapes punishment for as a weakness of the Western world and encouragement to escalate. Moscow has not fulfilled the terms of the agreement for a long time. It has created missile carriers uncontrollably, equipped them with nuclear warheads, stuffed Kaliningrad region with missiles, and now violates the agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, bringing carriers and, obviously, warheads into occupied Crimea. This is a critical threat to Europe, the European command of NATO and the geopolitical interests of the United States. Of course, the threat is growing for Ukraine," he said during an online Q&A session with the Ukrainian news outlet Glavred's readers. According to the political analyst, Russia previously had a more favorable economic climate, which allowed the Kremlin to secretly build up weapons. "The bubble has burst, and now the United States is demonstrating its readiness to go back to the arms race. The United States has a financial and economic 'fat,' while 'Putistan' has only skin and bones," the expert said. Chornovil added the situation was similar to that during the Cold War, when Reagan nudged the USSR into disintegrating. "With one thing that is different: Soviet and American missiles could have mutually destroyed both superpowers. And now all American missiles can reach Russia, and Russians only threaten Europe," he said.
Period of 'Cold Peace', not 'new Cold War' And since Russia plays a critical role in on-shore balance as well as off-shore balance in Northeast Asia and the Western Pacific in case of an unexpected crisis, or in crisis management, the possibility of a "new Cold War" seems remote. It is more likely that the new period will be one "Cold Peace" between the US and Russia, and between the US and China, partly because domestic issues are exerting greater pressure on the major powers' foreign policies. The Sino-US partnership has reached a low level, so the development of a new Sino-US paradigm will have a huge impact on the world－just as Sino-US relations did in the past 40 years. Moreover, the spectrum of cooperation between or among the US, Russia and China will be driven by their common interests as well as parallel interests, although parallel interests could be found only in specific and conditional cases, which could lead to fragile cooperation. Therefore, protecting the nonproliferation regime, fighting terrorism and combating drugs and arms trafficking will remain significant parts of bilateral and multilateral cooperation, as global and regional governance seem to worsen.
Global Peace: Why a Major War Is Impossible in Modern International Relations 06.06.2019 Andrey Sushentsov © Reuters Despite growing signs of military preparations under way in leading world countries, there is every reason to believe that a major war is impossible in modern international relations, as is evidenced, inter alia, by the recent Indian-Pakistani war crisis that involved an exchange of air strikes and took a toll of several hundred lives. Eventually, both nuclear states stepped back from the brink and prepared the ground for a return to the status ante bellum without either side loosing face. This and other similar episodes show that the military factor is still important when it comes to international relations. But the same circumstances indicate that leading military powers are unwilling to use war as a method of solving differences between themselves. At the same time, different parts of the world have a belt of fragile states that are much inferior to the leading powers militarily and often become a field of rivalry between them. However, this field is gradually contracting. The leading countries make mistakes during crises that accompany their rivalry and eventually acquire new experience of restraint and responsible behavior. We can say that this experience of living in a fragile and increasingly unpredictable world is somehow akin to the tempering of steel as it is transformed from ore to a stronger material. The three key processes leading to the strengthening of the fabric of international relations are the Russia-West rivalry, the Russia-China entente, and a strategic autonomy of an increasing number of great powers. The first key trend is the Russia-West rivalry. Focused mostly on the Eurasian continent, it is a rivalry of economic and integration models. It bears little resemblance to the Cold War militarily, although certain aspects of political rivalry are also obvious. The scale of deployed forces and assets are lower by an order of magnitude than the threshold levels of the late 1980s, while the preparations made after the Ukraine crisis are very much unlike the efforts to raise an army of invasion or a force grouping deployed by the Warsaw Treaty Organization and NATO in Germany. At the same time, there is a belt of fragile states in East Europe and the Balkans, which are the first to become a field of confrontation between Russia and the West. But this confrontation is not frontal. The West, like Russia’s allies, are involved in a controversy over a strategic course. The European allies of the US are often at loggerheads with the United States over the increases in military spending or the possible aims of US military invasions. Russia’s allies are often ambivalent towards its political solution to conflicts. There is still uncertainty on the prospects for Europe’s strategic autonomy vis-à-vis the United States but this problem makes it difficult to clarify whether or not Russia and the West are confronting each other in Eurasia. A rise in military tension in Europe is not on the cards. In response to Polish and Baltic requests, the US often takes minimal political steps that cause considerable information reverberations. But if we are to use the Cold War metaphor, Europe is a scene of a Strange Cold War that lacks aggressive offensive action, while the confrontation between the adversaries is in the form of continuous and still effective political provocations. A recent case in point is the scandal in Austria that allegedly involved a Russian citizen who turned out to be a Bosnian female student. However, this led to the downfall of Sebastian Kurtz’s government. The second key trend is the emergence of a Russian-Chinese entente, for which structural conditions have ripened. The Russian and Chinese political and economic gravitation centers are in different parts of Eurasia and have different vectors. Seventy-five percent of the Russian population and GDP are in European Russia, while most of China’s population and GDP are concentrated along its Pacific coast. The Russian vector is pointing to Europe, China’s, to the Pacific. Thus, they are back to back in relation to each other and facing one and the same rival, the United States. The entente has taken shape as a result of a protracted rapprochement that began in the late 1980s. The current state of relations is, without exaggeration, unprecedentedly close in the strategic sense. But this is not a formal military alliance. The West is just beginning to conceptualize Russian-Chinese relations. As to Russian and Chinese experts, they have been watching the consolidation of strategic relations between the two countries for over two decades. In the aggregate, the Russian-Chinese rapprochement has led to the disappearance of a security frontier in Central Eurasia. Russia and China are not competing for political influence in Central Asian countries and Mongolia, as is always the case with Ukraine that has finally become a bone of contention between Russia and the West. We can say that the Russian-Chinese rapprochement is a guarantee of stability for countries in the region, which helps them weather any political stresses (such as the transit of power) without the interference from outside forces. Moreover, Russia and China have a constructive approach to approximating their own integration initiatives. Establishing connectivity between the EAEU and One Belt, One Road is extremely important in this sense. Rail and motor haulage of cargo in Central Asia will be able to provide an economic impetus to all countries in the region. Finally, the third key trend is a strategic autonomy of a growing number of great powers. According to expert estimates, India and China are set to become the key world economies before 2050. China will reach parity in conventional forces with the US even earlier than that and will have the same number of carrier task forces. India, although with a somewhat delay, will also have one of the strongest armies in the world. Iran and Turkey, two traditional great powers, are also pursuing active foreign policies. Much depends on their involvement in regional policies in the Middle East. Pakistan and Israel, both nuclear states, are also active in international affairs, something that only complicates the strategic equation. Egypt and Saudi Arabia are not always predictable and convenient as allies for their historical partner, the United States. In the final analysis, an independent course steered by each major player makes analysis and international forecasting even more difficult, while increasing uncertainty on the continent. The Russian-Turkish crisis in 2015, the gravest military incident in Russia-NATO relations since the Cold War, is possibly the most conspicuous sign of this complicated environment. The Russian-Turkish crisis, like the recent Indian-Pakistani standoff, shows that unexpected and unpredictable events of high importance can take shape not only in expected sectors but also in those that seemed insignificant. But countries involved in each of these episodes display commonsense and don’t see war as a method to settle their differences. The multiplying military crises allow their participants to understand that global peace is a common value and there is no political goal, for which it could be sacrificed.
And there’s an added concern that the Javelins could fall into enemy hands. Current reports state they are to remain in central Ukraine, under the watchful eyes of U.S. trainers. Even if they were to be deployed to stop any Russian breakout, it’s questionable they could be deployed fast enough or in great enough numbers to change the tide of the conflict. Not to mention that the current conflict is largely fought with artillery. 3) What does the U.S. lose by sending this weaponry to Ukraine? Ultimately, knowing when to use your tools and options is as important as having them. Sending Ukraine advanced weaponry today gains little military advantage, and sacrifices political leverage.
Ukraine tested its new Javelin anti-tank missiles Tuesday for the first time since the United States approved the sale of the weapon system to assist Ukraine’s defenses in its ongoing conflict with pro-Russian separatists. Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko announced the first test of the missiles over Twitter. “Finally this day has come! Today, for the first time in Ukraine, the launch of Javelin missile complexes took place,” Poroshenko wrote. “This is a very effective defensive weaponry, which is used in the event of Russian offensive on the positions of Ukrainian troops.” Poroshenko also wrote that he was grateful to U.S. leadership, including President Donald Trump and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, for deciding that Ukraine should be armed with the weapons. The Trump administration began the process of clearing sales of lethal military aid to Ukraine in December, though it was commonly characterized as “defensive lethal aid.” Javelin anti-tank missiles were eventually cleared for sale to Ukraine in March by the U.S. State Department for an estimated cost of $47 million, which includes 210 missiles and 37 launchers. The sale of the Javelin missile — and weapons such as the PSRL-1 rocket-propelled grenade launcher — are meant to be used in the event of a resurgence in the Ukrainian conflict, not for offensive purposes. Currently, the conflict is set at a simmer, with Ukrainian and pro-Russian separatist forces bogged down in the eastern part of the country, known as the Donbas. Although the last attempt at a cease-fire in March has not held, with gunfire and mortars exchanged almost daily, not much strategic progress has been made for either side. To date, fighting in Ukraine has killed more than 10,000 people, including roughly 2,700 civilians, according to the United Nations. The U.S.-made FGM-148 Javelin is a fire-and-forget anti-tank missile that uses infrared guidance to hit armored targets. The guidance system is contrasted to wire-guided anti-tank missiles, which require a shooter to actively guide the weapon until it hits its target. A Javelin shooter can immediately seek cover after firing its shot. Javelin missiles are made in a partnership between Raytheon and Lockheed Martin. The missile utilizes a high-explosive, anti-tank warhead that is capable of defeating modern armored vehicles by attacking from above. It could also prove useful against fortifications in a direct attack flight, according to the U.S. Army manual on the weapon. Javelin missiles are reported by Raytheon to have a more than 94 percent reliability rate. The weapon can deploy from multiple platforms and can be used in all weather, day or night operations. The missile is scheduled to be in the U.S. inventory until 2050 and can be dispatched from vehicle-mounted positions. Kiev and Washington have previously said the arrival of the Javelins will help Ukraine build a better long-term defense capability to keep the cost high for what the two governments consider Russian aggression. Russian officials, meanwhile, view the sale of Javelin missiles as an unnecessary provocation. “Supplying U.S. and Canadian means of warfare to Ukraine is paramount to pushing Kiev, which has been sabotaging a peaceful settlement in the east of the country, towards reckless new military decisions,” Zakharova said in a statement. Although not a NATO member, Ukraine intends to invite the alliance’s forces deeper into eastern Europe. Under the mentorship of Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine, the program name for the training mission being conducted by U.S. forces in support of the country, the Ukrainian military is working toward establishing a NATO combat training center near Yavoriv, Ukraine, by 2020. Currently, an area near that location is used as the International Peacekeeping Security Center, where forces are trained to counter terrorism and the use of improvised explosive devices, as well as peacekeeping missions.
During the last few weeks, the economic tragedy in Venezuela has evolved into a full-blown political crisis. Demands for President Nicolas Maduro's ouster, now fronted by the head of the opposition-controlled National Assembly Juan Guaido, have reached fever pitch as years of his misrule have destroyed Venezuela’s once prosperous economy. Trump Administration's reaction to the crisis stands out as a notable anomaly in his foreign policy record. Thus far, his strategy has differed from that of his predecessors by seeking to scale down American military commitments in Afghanistan and the Middle East, moving the U.S. Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, convening a summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un and cultivating a well-documented relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin. However, the decision to recognize Guaido as the legitimate Venezuelan leader is exactly what we would have expected from any recent president, going as far back as Ronald Reagan almost four decades ago. As one of its strongest economic partners, particularly with ties in crude oil, loans and arms sales, Russia is unlikely to abandon Venezuela any time soon. To give an example, Kremlin-controlled oil company, Rosneft, has provided billions in credit lines and loans to Venezuela, and remains an active financial backer of the Maduro government. President Vladimir Putin has warned the U.S. against aggressively supporting the Venezuelan opposition and criticized Trump’s suggestion that U.S. military intervention could be an option in resolving the current crisis. This is significant because historically, the Trump Administration has sought to avoid pushing back against Russian actions in Ukraine and elsewhere. Additionally, on the backdrop of this crisis lurks the ongoing enquiry into Russian involvement in the 2016 election and Trump’s financial ties with Moscow. With that in mind, the current differences between the two countries regarding an issue of such urgency raises many questions about the bilateral relationship. Trump's critics have drawn attention to his comments regarding NATO, his withdrawal of troops from Syria and his Brexit views, claiming that they support Moscow’s position rather than conventional American ones. However, the Trump Administration’s policy on Venezuela is different as it directly confronts Russia and offers nothing to Moscow. Aside from the economic interests guiding Russia’s support of Maduro, also important is Putin’s uneasiness with the concept of regime change and “Color Revolutions.” From the Russian view, regime change is an often-used Washington foreign policy strategy which seeks topple U.S. opponents, particularly in Russia’s “near abroad.” Russia will see the fall of Maduro as another example of that trend.
MOSCOW — Russia and the United States remain far apart on Iran, election interference and a host of world crises, the nations’ top diplomats made clear Tuesday, despite President Vladimir V. Putin’s expressed hope that the end of the special counsel’s investigation would clear the way for fully restored relations. In the Black Sea resort of Sochi, Russia, both Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov described their discussion as “frank,” often diplomat-speak to describe disagreements verging on testy, and they bemoaned the state of affairs between the two nations. “It is clear that our relations have seen better times,” Mr. Lavrov said. During a joint news conference, Mr. Pompeo had some particularly sharp words on Russia’s election meddling, telling his counterpart that “interference in American elections is unacceptable, and if the Russians were engaged in that in 2020 it would put our relationship in an even worse place than it has been.” Much of the world’s attention is riveted currently on the Persian Gulf region, where the Trump administration is pressuring Iran with harsh economic sanctions and military deployments, and where mysterious attacks have been reported this week on oil tankers and pipelines of Iran’s great rival, Saudi Arabia, raising fears of a coming violent conflict. But at least publicly, Mr. Lavrov and Mr. Pompeo gave the impression that Iran was not at the top of their agenda, and most of their remarks on it dealt with the 2015 nuclear deal that the United States has withdrawn from but that Russia and other powers still support. “We’re looking for Iran to behave like a normal country,” Mr. Pompeo said, one that does not sponsor terrorism and assassinations and develop offensive weapons. “We fundamentally do not seek a war with Iran.” Mr. Pompeo, making his first visit to Russia as secretary of state, addressed this week’s events near the Persian Gulf only briefly, and in response to a direct question from a reporter. “I don’t have any information that I can share with you yet about the nature of what took place there,” he said. “We’re working diligently to get answers to what caused those ships to have the problems that they have today.” Mr. Lavrov indignantly denied, once again, that Russia had meddled in the 2016 American election. He and Mr. Pompeo later met with Mr. Putin, who said he expected the publication of the report by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, would allow for greater Russian-American cooperation. “You need to give him credit,” Mr. Putin said of Mr. Mueller during a brief news conference before he met with Mr. Pompeo. “In the whole, he carried out an objective investigation and confirmed the absence of any evidence of conspiracy between Russia and the current administration.” And although a significant portion of the report detailed Russian efforts to influence the 2016 election, Mr. Putin told Mr. Pompeo, “There was no meddling from our side in the American elections.” Mr. Putin said that from a telephone conversation with Mr. Trump a few days earlier, “I had the impression the president is set on restoring Russian-American ties and contacts.” He added, “I hope now we have the necessary conditions for this.” At the news conference with Mr. Lavrov, Mr. Pompeo said he was seeking to fulfill President Trump’s intention to improve Russian-American ties. The diplomats spoke at some length about disputes that have been on a slow boil in recent months, on which they have found themselves on opposite sides, including Iran and the crisis in Venezuela. The two also raised the possibility of opening negotiations on extending the only remaining nuclear treaty between Moscow and Washington, called New Start, which limits the number of intercontinental missiles, warheads and heavy bombers each can have. The Trump administration’s suspension of an intermediate-range missile treaty, and Mr. Putin’s withdrawal in response, had called into doubt the prospects for extending New Start, which is set to expire in 2021. Mr. Lavrov said that Russia does support negotiations over nuclear disarmament with North Korea — Mr. Trump’s signature foreign policy initiative. But although Mr. Putin met with the North’s leader, Kim Jong-un, last month, Mr. Lavrov offered no suggestion that the stalemate in nuclear talks would break anytime soon. “We are ready to support that dialogue,” he said. In Venezuela, one of the many countries where Russia and the United States disagree on solutions to a crisis, Mr. Lavrov suggested that President Nicolás Maduro, whom Russia backs, was open to talks with the opposition. But Mr. Lavrov criticized Juan Guaidó, the opposition leader backed by the Trump administration, for asserting that he had a right to invite American officials to intervene. “Russia is in favor of the people of this country determining its future,” he said. Mr. Pompeo, in turn, said he had “made clear” the American position that Russia should not interfere in Venezuelan politics. “We hope that Russia’s support for Maduro will end,” he said. “But despite our disagreements, we’ll keep talking.” The West tends to blame tensions with Russia on Moscow’s attempts to destabilize its rivals, undermine democracies and alliances, and expand its influence. Mr. Lavrov had a simpler explanation for the poor state of relations with Washington: the “anti-Russian sentiment” of the Obama administration, though things have not noticeably improved in more than two years under President Trump.
Russia’s president said on Saturday that Moscow would do all it could to improve relations with the United States that have been strained by years of diplomatic conflicts over Ukraine and accusations of Russian meddling in U.S. elections. Vladimir Putin was speaking at the G20 summit in Osaka where he met U.S. President Donald Trump to discuss issues ranging from trade to disarmament. He also invited Trump to visit Moscow in May next year. Trump confirmed that Putin had invited him to a ceremony to mark 75 years since Russia’s World War Two defeat of the Nazis. “He invited me and I said I would give it very serious consideration,” Trump told a news conference after the summit. Putin described the talks in Osaka as a “good meeting, business-like, pragmatic” and said the leaders agreed that two-way economic ties required improvement. “I think we both understand that we need to somehow resolve the current situation,” Putin said, adding that the two nations needed to “somehow find the strength to turn the page and move forward.” Asked during a news conference at the summit about the probability of more U.S. sanctions against Russia, Putin said it was up to Washington to decide how best to build relations with Moscow. Putin said he and Trump had discussed the election meddling allegations and the situation in Venezuela. But he gave no details.
Adding to the confusion over the Administration’s policy and attitude toward Russia is the contradictory rhetoric coming from most senior officials, and from the President himself. During the 2016 election campaign and even as President, Trump frequently asks, “Wouldn’t it be great if we and Russia got along?” The answer to that is yes, of course. But it’s the wrong question to ask. The better question is, “Can we and Russia get along as long as the Putin regime is in power without sacrificing our values, interests, and other countries?” The answer there is equally obvious: No! Moreover, Trump’s desire for better relations with his Russian counterpart and his unwillingness to fault Putin for virtually anything cloud the rest of his Administration’s approach in dealing with Russia. Many of the Administration’s actions in pushing back on Putin are praiseworthy. Despite concerns in its very first week that it would lift sanctions against Russia, the Administration has maintained and even ramped up sanctions, thanks largely to congressional pressure to do so. It has provided lethal military assistance to Ukraine and Georgia to help those countries defend themselves against further Russian aggression, something President Obama refused to do. The United States, together with NATO allies, in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has beefed up its military presence in countries close to Russia, a move started under the Obama Administration. The Trump Administration is boosting liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports to Europe, denting Russia’s share of the market there. It has strongly pushed for cancelation of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany that would make an existing pipeline running through Ukraine obsolete, causing serious financial harm to Ukraine to the tune of $2 billion per year in transit fees. All of these actions are laudable and represent a firm pushback against the Kremlin. They have been accompanied by tough rhetoric from a range of Administration officials who have not been shy in criticizing Putin’s regime, whether for its human rights abuses, its violations of its neighbors’ sovereignty, or Russia’s interference in other countries’ elections, not least the U.S. elections in 2016 and 2018. Vice President Mike Pence visited Estonia and Georgia in 2017, demonstrating solidarity with those frontline states.
WASHINGTON — Russia typically brushes off new U.S. sanctions. Not this time. The Trump administration announcement of export restrictions in response to accusations Moscow used a nerve agent to poison a former Russian spy in Britain sent the ruble tumbling to a two-year low and drew a stern warning from its prime minister. While the initial sanctions may have a limited impact, a second batch expected within months could hit the Russian economy much harder and send already tense relations into a tailspin. If sanctions are expanded even further to target Russia’s top state-controlled banks, freezing their dollar transactions — as proposed under legislation introduced in the Senate this month — it would amount to a “declaration of economic war,” Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said Friday. So much for President Donald Trump’s hopes for better relations with Moscow. On his watch, the U.S. has imposed a slew of sanctions on Russia for human rights abuses, meddling in the U.S. election and Russian military aggression in Ukraine and Syria. But for the most part, those measures have punished Russian officials and associates of President Vladimir Putin rather than targeting broad economic sectors. More biting restrictions have been imposed by the European Union, which conducts more trade and business with Russia than the U.S. does. The sanctions announced by the Trump administration this past week could start to change that equation. The restrictions were triggered under U.S. law on chemical weapons following a formal U.S. determination that Russia used the Novichok nerve agent to poison former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter in the English city of Salisbury in March. The first tranche, due to take effect Aug. 22, will deny export licenses to Russia for the purchase of many items with national security implications. Existing sanctions already prohibit the export of most military and security-related items, but now the ban will be extended to goods such as gas turbine engines, electronics and calibration equipment that were previously allowed on a case-by-case basis. The State Department said it could potentially affect hundreds of millions of dollars in trade.
The U.S. deployment of land-based missile systems near Russia’s borders could lead to a stand-off comparable to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov was quoted as saying on Monday. Russia has been fiercely critical of U.S. plans to deploy missile systems in eastern Europe, and of Washington’s withdrawal from the INF arms control treaty. The Cuban missile crisis erupted in 1962 when the Soviet Union responded to a U.S. missile deployment in Turkey by sending ballistic missiles to Cuba, sparking a standoff that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war. The crisis was defused when Soviet ships headed for Cuba turned back in the face of a U.S. naval blockade. Eventually, the Soviet Union agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba; in return, the United States promised not to invade Cuba and, secretly, said it would remove the U.S. missiles from Turkey. “If things get as far as an actual deployment on the ground of these sorts of systems, then the situation won’t just get more complicated, it will escalate right to the limit,” RIA news agency quoted Ryabkov as saying. “We could find ourselves in a situation where we have a rocket crisis close not just to the crisis of the 1980s but close to the Caribbean crisis,” Ryabkov said, using the standard Russian term for the Cuban missile crisis. Russian President Vladimir Putin made similar remarks in February, when he warned that Moscow would match any U.S. move to deploy new nuclear missiles closer to Russia by stationing its own missiles closer to the United States, deploying faster missiles or both. Earlier that month, the United States said it would withdraw from the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty with Russia in six months unless Moscow ended violations of the landmark 1987 arms control pact. Russia denies any violations. (Reporting by Maria Kiselyova, writing by Christian Lowe; editing by Larry King)
That said, regardless of specifics of Warsaw and Washington's potential new defense agreement, any increase in the United States' military position in Poland — no matter how small — is bound to prompt Russia to build up its own military position. One potential site for such a military buildup would be Belarus, which is already one of Russia's key defense partners as a member of the Moscow-led Collective Security Treaty Organization. Russia has long eyed its western neighbor as a spot for expanding its military foothold, particularly in the form of an airbase near Belarus' border with Poland. Thus, permanent stationing of US forces in Poland — no matter how small — could provide Moscow with just the motivation it needs to act on such efforts. Belarussian President Alexander Lukashenko awards Russian servicemen during the Zapad 2017 war games at a range near the town of Borisov, Belarus September 20, 2017. REUTERS/Vasily Fedosenko Belarussian President Alexander Lukashenko with Russian servicemen during the Zapad 2017 war games near the town of Borisov, Belarus September 20, 2017. Thomson Reuters However, despite Belarus' strong military ties with Russia, Minsk has so far resisted the idea of opening a Russian military base on its territory. This is partially due to Belarus' long-serving president, Alexander Lukashenko, who has sought to preserve the country's autonomy from its domineering eastern neighbor. Since the 2014 Euromaidan uprising in Ukraine, Belarus has tried to position itself as a mediating force between Russia and the West, as opposed to just being a pawn in Moscow's global strategy. As a result, Belarus has served as the main site for negotiations over the Ukrainian conflict (producing the Minsk Protocol truces). Lukashenko has also leveraged this conciliatory position to ease Western pressure on his own government, allowing Minsk to even squeeze out economic concessions (albeit limited) from Europe and the United States. That said, a new US foothold in Poland could very well change Belarus' considerations. Such a military presence would be close to Belarus' borders, posing a more direct threat to the country. Indeed, in late 2018, Lukashenko warned Polish Foreign Minister Jacek Czaputowicz that Belarus and Russia would "have to respond" to Warsaw's proposed US base, adding that the two countries "would be forced to deploy something" to counter Warsaw and Washington. The president's warning suggests that a Russian air base in Belarus is indeed on the table and that Minsk is willing to prioritize its own security interests over its burgeoning outreach to the West. Of course, an air base isn't the only way Russia could increase its military presence in Belarus. Moscow could, for example, build up other assets in the country, such as fighter jets and air defense systems. Russia could also choose to bolster its presence in other nearby areas — including Kaliningrad, Crimea and eastern Ukraine — depending on the nature of the US deployment in Poland. Duda's upcoming visit to Washington on June 12 could yield significant progress toward the realization of military deal, which Poland is hoping to finalize before Trump visits Warsaw for a World War II commemoration on Sept. 1. But the United States and Poland will do so at the risk of escalating the arms competition between Moscow and the West, as both Russia and Belarus have made it clear that a beefed-up US military presence — whether it be concentrated in the form an entirely new base in Poland, or spread out across the country's existing bases — will leave the two Eastern allies little choice but to respond with even greater military buildups of their own.
Russian President Vladimir Putin told members of the Russian media on Wednesday that if the US exits the Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty and deploys nuclear weapons to Europe, Russia will follow suit—by placing nuclear weapons off the coast of the US. The comments came on the heels of an announcement by Putin that a nuclear powered, nuclear-armed unmanned submersible vehicle (essentially a giant nuclear torpedo) was nearly ready for deployment. The Russian president said the first submarine equipped to carry it would be ready as soon as this spring. Best bad idea ever? Why Putin’s nuclear-powered missile is possible… and awful "If they create threats to us, they should be aware of the potential consequences, so that they will not accuse us of unnecessary aggressiveness or whatever later," Putin said in comments following his February 20 address to Russia's Federal Assembly. "They have announced their decision," he said, referencing President Donald Trump's decision to withdraw from the INF treaty. "We know what can follow it. We tell them, 'Do the maths. Can you count? So, do it before making any decisions that would create additional threats to you.'" Putin boasts new strategic weapons will make US missile defense “useless” To make that point clearer, Putin gave some of the numbers for "the maths." First, he would put nuclear-armed missiles on submarines or surface ships. "At a speed of Mach 9, these missiles can strike a target more than 1,000 km away," he explained. "Under the Law of the Sea, the exclusive economic zone is defined at some 400 km or 200 miles. Do the maths. The distance of 1,000 kilometers at Mach 9. How soon, in how many minutes, can these weapons reach their targets? Just compare, the flight time to Moscow is between 10 and 12 minutes. How long would it take to reach the decision-making centers that are creating threats to us? The calculation is not in their favor, at least, not today." Putin acknowledged "problems" between the US and Russia, but he blamed the US government for creating even more problems: Is there any harsh confrontation between two world systems, as it happened during the Cold War? Absolutely not. Yes, we do have mutual complaints and different approaches to problems, and the complaints are mutual. But this is no reason for aggravating this to the level of the Cuban Missile Crisis of the 1960s. Anyway, I think we do not want this. If somebody else wants this, they can do it. I have said today what will follow. Let them make their calculations.
MOSCOW—Relations between the U.S. and Russia are at their most dangerous point in years, said a top Russian diplomat, with the two rivals locked in a stalemate over how to revive an important Cold War-era arms treaty and President Vladimir Putin blaming Washington for failing to undertake talks on new weapons pacts. Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov, the diplomat responsible for relations with the U.S., said in a recent interview with The Wall Street Journal that resuscitating the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty, a 1987 pact signed by Moscow and Washington that limited the development of such missiles, was unlikely. Mr. Ryabkov also ruled out new arms-control deals with the U.S. “until the U.S. is ready for it.” “We are now at a point that is much, much lower than at any period since the worst days of the Cold War even, because at that moment we were able to somehow predict how things [would] unfold,” he said. “Now, fluidity and unpredictability are so predominant…you have a situation [where] dangers are growing.” In Washington, State Department spokeswoman Morgan Ortagus said the deterioration of relations between the two countries was a direct result of Russia’s actions in recent years. “The United States would welcome improved relations with Russia,” Ms. Ortagus said. “However, it is incumbent on Russia to address the causes of the breakdown of the bilateral relationship, such as Ukraine and election interference.” The U.S. and Russia are at loggerheads over a raft of issues, ranging from Mr. Putin’s support of Venezuelan President Nicholás Maduro to Russia’s involvement in Syria. Washington has slapped Russia with sanctions over Moscow’s seizure of territory in Ukraine and accusations that the Kremlin endorsed interference in the U.S. 2016 presidential election. Moscow maintains that the Crimean Peninsula is its rightful territory and denies tampering with the U.S. vote. Earlier this year, the U.S. said it would stop abiding by the INF treaty, accusing Russia of violating the deal, allegations that Moscow rejects. Soon after, Russia suspended its obligations under the pact, raising concern over the threat of a new arms race. The fate of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, or New START treaty, which limits the number of nuclear-weapons launchers owned by Russia and the U.S., also hangs in the balance. The pact, signed in 2010, is up for renewal in 2021, but Washington has shown little interest in extending the agreement. Mr. Putin said earlier this month that Moscow had said “a hundred times” that it was ready to extend the START agreement, but “if no one feels like renewing [it]…we will not renew it.” The end of the pact would mean “no more instruments to limit an arms race,” added the Russian president. Ms. Ortagus cited consensus among NATO members that Russia breached the INF Treaty and that the U.S. was justified in suspending its obligations in response. Regarding New START, Ms. Ortagus said the Trump administration is “open to future effective arms control agreements with Russia where both parties adhere to their obligations.” A Russian expert in U.S.-Russia relations offered a gloomy assessment of the situation. “There’s no reason to expect any changes [in U.S.-Russia relations] in the foreseeable future” said Fyodor Lukyanov, chairman of the presidium of the Council on Foreign and Defense Policy, a nongovernmental think tank in Moscow. “There’s a desire in Russia to keep this relationship going, but the relationship is fundamentally empty.” Mr. Ryabkov said that despite the disagreements with Washington, Russian authorities “believe in our relationship with the U.S.” But he added, “there is no place for miracles in this relationship.” On Venezuela, Mr. Ryabkov denied reports that Moscow has dispatched combat troops to help Mr. Maduro remain in power amid a battle with opposition leader Juan Guaidó, who declared himself interim president in January. While the U.S. supports Mr. Guaidó, Moscow backs Mr. Maduro, charging that Washington’s recognition of Mr. Guaidó is aimed at destabilizing the Southern American nation. “The Russian servicemen present in Venezuela are servicemen in the proper sense of the word, because they are technicians,” Mr. Ryabkov said. “Those are not combat forces, much less special forces capable of autonomous individual operations.”
The tit-for-tat US-Russia sanctions ­– combined with Cold War-era warnings over Russian military escalation in eastern Europe – will inflict substantial casualties if the financial-market warfare continues to escalate. While markets have largely taken the tensions in their stride – banking that Russia won’t escalate the conflict militarily further – the risks for Russian borrowers and financial intermediaries loom large while the economy faces the prospect of a technical recession this year, say analysts. Underscoring fears over Russia’s declining creditworthiness, following Standard & Poor’s move last week to downgrade its BBB outlook to negative from neutral, Moscow has hit back, warning Kiev of its litany of debts. This includes an $11 billion burden for gas, according to a 2009 agreement, the $2 billion owed to Gazprom and $3 billion for Russian-backed sovereign bonds. According to Timothy Ash, head of emerging market (EM) research ex-Africa at Standard Bank: “Russia’s attempt to pursue Ukraine for past gas debts, and to disrupt broader economic ties/relationships with Ukraine, could well be viewed as escalation from Washington.” In this scenario, the US has made it clear that sector-specific sanctions, including on energy, services and financials, are measures that could follow. It’s not about tanks or aggressive military spending in this Cold War re-awakening. Instead, the US, and to a less extent the EU, are looking to undermine Russia’s place in the international financial system, say analysts. According to Steven Englander, global head of G10 FX strategy at Citi: “The Russia/Ukraine crisis may be the first major political conflict that is played out in international financial markets. One advantage using finance as a weapon is that it can be scaled up or down as needed, and is much more reversible than military actions. “It is also quicker than traditional trade sanctions to have an impact, and arguably is more likely to hit decision-makers and those who have access to them than trade sanctions, which often hit the poor and almost always create profit-making opportunities for the well-connected in sanctions-running.” Both sides have weapons and vulnerabilities. Short of asset freezes, the US has plenty of ammo. Lawyers say bankers are looking closely at their know-your-customer (KYC) due-diligence practices to ensure end-user Russian exposures are sufficiently transparent. Ash says the US SEC and the US Department of Justice could signal to “US-based banks that their full and total compliance with the existing Foreign Corrupt Practices Act is expected and will be subject to extensive audit ... In effect, such moves by the US authorities would produce very significant compliance by a large weight of the global financial system.” He adds: “Second, and perhaps similarly, the US/west might look to express concern over Russian compliance with the FATF [Financial Action Task Force on money-laundering and terrorism financing], and pressure perhaps for Russia to move onto the grey watch-list of ‘needing to do more’, and potentially then onto the black list. FATF black-list status would prevent global banks from dealing with their Russian counterparts.”
MOSCOW—Russia has withdrawn key defense advisers from Venezuela, an embarrassment for President Nicolás Maduro as Moscow weighs the leader’s political and economic resilience against growing U.S. pressure. Russian state defense contractor Rostec, which has trained Venezuelan troops and advised on securing arms contracts, has cut its staff in Venezuela to just a few dozen from about 1,000 at the height of cooperation between Moscow and Caracas several years ago, said a person close to the Russian defense ministry. The gradual pullout, which has escalated over the past several months, according to people familiar with the situation, is due to a lack of new contracts and the acceptance that Mr. Maduro’s regime no longer has the cash to continue to pay for other Rostec services associated with past contracts. Russia has been among Mr. Maduro’s biggest international supporters, but the winding down of Rostec’s presence shows the limits of Russia’s reach in the South American country at a time when Moscow is facing economic difficulties—in part due to the impact of U.S. sanctions—at home. Venezuela has been one of Moscow’s largest customers in South America. Rostec’s withdrawal of permanent and temporary employees is a major setback for Mr. Maduro, who has frequently touted assistance support from Russia and China as a sign that other global powers are willing to assist him in his bitter standoff against the U.S. Russian military support has been central to Mr. Maduro’s pledge to defend Venezuela from any foreign invasion. His government’s inability to pay Rostec also reflects the economic calamity gripping facing the country. The Maduro government didn’t respond to a request to comment. Under Russian President Vladimir Putin, Moscow’s defense exports have become a foreign-policy tool. The arms trade is overseen in some places by embassy employees themselves to help strengthen ties with political partners from Asia to South America, according to one of the people familiar with the situation. The defense contractor, run by Mr. Putin’s longtime friend Sergei Chemezov, has been hit by financial difficulties as U.S. sanctions have derailed several big contracts. A person close to the Russian government said Rostec weighed the political benefits of supporting Mr. Maduro against the regime’s growing economic liabilities, forcing the company to make a strategic decision on ties with Caracas. “They believe the fight is being lost,” said the person. The final major contract Rostec fulfilled was the construction of a helicopter-training center for military helicopters in March. Other longstanding plans, including the construction of a Kalashnikov rifle production facility, were expected to cease, the people said. Russia-Venezuela defense ties flourished under Mr. Maduro’s predecessor, Hugo Chávez, with arms contracts for attack helicopters, jet fighters and tanks. “This cooperation has grown a lot,” Vladimir Zaemskiy, Russia’s longtime ambassador to Venezuela, said in an interview Wednesday. “Among other things, Venezuela has bought assault rifles, multiuse aircraft, helicopters from the Mi-17, Mi-35 and Mi-26 models, T-72 tanks, as well as various anti-aerial defense systems.” He said that because of the sophistication of the weaponry, “it’s obvious that the Venezuelans needed Russian assistance and those contracts that we have signed since 2006 foresaw, among other things, the training of Venezuelan personnel and maintenance of that equipment.” By the end of last year, contracts were still continuing for missiles and air-defense systems, but money had stopped coming in, said a person close to Russia’s defense ministry. “Since the Venezuelans aren’t paying, why should Rostec stay there and foot the bill on its own,” the person said. The person added that, for months now, Venezuela hasn’t been paying for services like the servicing of military hardware.
MOSCOW (Reuters) - The Kremlin said on Thursday the Russian military was closely tracking U.S. plans to beef up its forces in Poland and taking steps to ensure Russia’s national security was not threatened by what Moscow regards as a betrayal of trust. U.S. President Donald Trump pledged to Polish President Andrzej Duda on Wednesday that he would deploy 1,000 extra U.S. troops to Poland as well as surveillance drones, a step sought by Warsaw to deter potential aggression from Russia. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Moscow would not stand by idly. “The Russian military is tracking these announcements very closely, is analyzing the information, and is doing what is necessary so that such steps in no way threaten the Russian Federation’s security,” Peskov said. Sergei Ryabkov, a Russian deputy foreign minister, was quoted by the RIA news agency as saying that Trump’s move probably reflected “aggressive” intentions. The U.S. deployment is certain to further sour already poor U.S.-Russia relations ahead of a G20 summit in Japan this month, at which Trump and President Vladimir Putin might meet. Putin said in an interview, published earlier on Thursday, that relations between Moscow and Washington were getting worse and worse.
NATO Expansion After promising not to do so, the US has expanded the NATO military alliance eastward, step-by-step, toward the European border of Russia. In his keynote speech to the 2019 Mass. Peace Action Annual Meeting, US Army Col. Lawrence Wilkerson, former chief of staff to Secretary of State Colin Powell, addressed the role that US-led NATO actions have played in increasing tensions between the two nuclear powers. He noted that James Baker, when Secretary of State, had promised the Soviet foreign minister that NATO “would not move one inch further east” if the Soviets agreed to the reunification of Germany and its retention in NATO. “And what did Bill Clinton do?” Wilkerson asked. “He took us to Georgia. Look at the map. That’s a little further than an inch.” Wilkerson said President Clinton’s insistence on selling F-16s to Poland “to keep Lockheed Martin viable and making obscene profits” was “why we have Putin in Ukraine and Putin in Georgia and Putin in Crimea…If I were Putin, I would have done exactly the same thing.” Trump, accused of being a pawn or an agent of the threatening Russian menace, has lost few opportunities to demonstrate hostility to that country, even though he had professed hopes of a better relationship during the campaign. His national security apparatus identified Russia and China as the new major threats to the US and inaugurated a huge new shopping spree from the military industrial complex. Trump has pulled the US out of the Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which reduced the danger of a short-range nuclear exchange in Europe, and has threatened not to renew the START treatywhen it expires in 2021. He withdrew the US from the Iran nuclear deal, in which Russia, Europe and China were partners, and he now threatens war with Iran. This year, the president attempted to overthrow Venezuela’s elected government and he has also threatened Cuba and Nicaragua. Russia has close financial relations with Venezuela and Cuba and has assisted these countries while they are under economic attack from US sanctions. Trump’s administration overruled Obama-era restrictions on the sale of  deadly weapons to the anti-Russian government of the Ukraine. Trump also stepped up US ground forces in Syria, where Russia had frustrated US plans for regime change. Finally, Trump is directly attacking vital Russian trade arrangements by threatening sanctions if Russia continues to pursue the Nord Stream 2 pipeline which is scheduled to be completed this year to bring natural gas from Russia to Germany. He has also threatened sanctions if Russia completes deals for the sale of some of its military technology to Turkey and India. In both of these cases, the U.S. is the main potential economic competitor to Russia and its corporate interests stand to profit if Turkey or India yields to the sanctions.
Speaking to Mir state TV on Thursday afternoon, Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed that U.S.-Russia relations are "deteriorating, getting worse by the hour. In recent years, the current U.S. administration has already taken several dozen decisions on sanctions with regard to Russia ..." Putin is correct about that deterioration, but he only need look in the mirror to understand why it's happening. U.S. sanctions and broader U.S. policy toward Russia did not just spring forth from the ether without cause. They are direct responses to varied and repeated acts of Russian hostility against U.S. interests. Let's consider some examples. There was Russia's 2016 U.S. election attacks and its 2018 interference with the midterm elections. There was the 2018 Russian super-high toxicity nerve agent attack on British soil. An attack which killed an innocent woman but failed to eliminate its intended target. There was the capture of Ukrainian sailors who simply sought to transit their own waters. Those sailors remain detained. There is Putin's continuing escalation against Ukraine's newly elected government and his continued retention of Crimea. There is Russia's deliberate targeting of Syrian hospitals in support of Bashar Assad's genocidal regime. This is what Putin is talking about when in his Mir interview he observed Russia's "significant contribution to the maintenance of universal peace and security." There are Russia's wide ranging efforts to undercut NATO, and blackmail Europe over energy supplies. There is Russia's support for Nicolas Maduro's starvation regime in Venezuela. And there is Russia's funding of Americans who support that regime. Then there's is Putin's development of advanced nuclear strike capabilities, and his destruction of the INF arms control treaty. There are the increasingly frequent bombing simulations against U.S. territory by Russian strategic bomber aircraft. There are Russia's risky interceptions of U.S. aircraft operating in international airspace. And there is Russia's deepening work with China to degrade the American-led international order. A nation, incidentally, with which Vladimir Putin finds comfort in the shared destruction of human freedom. If Putin wants better relations with the U.S. and a relaxation of U.S. sanctions, he only needs do the opposite of everything he has been doing.
So let's assess the summit in advance by what Mr. Putin wants now from Mr. Trump. The U.S. President considers himself a shrewd negotiator, so we can measure the results by how much of the Putin agenda the former KGB operative gets Mr. Trump to concede. -- Prestige. Mr. Putin's top priority at all times is shoring up his political standing at home, where he lacks democratic legitimacy. This means striding the world stage as if Russia is again a global power, and Mr. Trump is helping Mr. Putin on this score merely by meeting him on equal terms. The Russian will also want Mr. Trump to endorse Mr. Putin's denials about meddling in the 2016 election -- which he will advertise as official absolution. Mr. Putin has been persona non grata in Europe since he invaded Crimea in 2014, and he wants Mr. Trump's help with rehabilitation. Expect Mr. Putin to flatter Mr. Trump for his willingness to disrupt global norms. He'll also want Mr. Trump to repeat his recent comments that Mr. Putin should rejoin the G-7. -- Syria. Mr. Putin has accomplished what he sought when he barged into Syria in 2015. He's saved Bashar Assad, fortified long-term military bases, and replaced the U.S. as chief power broker in the region. He wants Mr. Trump to validate these gains and withdraw U.S. troops from eastern Syria. In return Mr. Putin may promise to help the U.S. contain Iran's presence in Syria, though there's no guarantee he can do so, given Iran's investment in Mr. Assad. The Russian knows Mr. Trump is eager to bring U.S. troops home and might rely on assurances on Iran the way he did on the "de-escalation" zone in southwestern Syria. Mr. Putin has helped Mr. Assad bomb the opposition in that part of Syria despite the Russian's assurances. -- Ukraine. Mr. Putin wants Mr. Trump to accept his Crimea annexation, perhaps in return for recommitting to the Minsk negotiation process for eastern Ukraine, where Russian forces started another illegal war. Mr. Trump has already blamed Barack Obama for losing Crimea, essentially a unilateral concession that Mr. Putin will pocket. The Russian will also try to get Mr. Trump to stop providing Kiev with lethal weapons. -- Lifting sanctions. This is Mr. Putin's top near-term priority. He needs to be able to enrich his cronies, and U.S. and European sanctions have become a major problem. The Russian will play to Mr. Trump's dislike for the European Union by suggesting Mr. Trump can come to an independent deal over Ukraine, Syria and sanctions. Mr. Putin knows that the Italian, Hungarian and Greek governments are wobbly on sanctions, and he'd like Mr. Trump to stir more dissension in the EU. -- The trans-Atlantic alliance. Mr. Putin knows that the stronger NATO is as a military force, the riskier it is for him to engage in foreign adventurism. The Russian's long-term goal is to erode the West's political will to add to its capabilities as the memories of Crimea fade. Mr. Putin will do whatever he can in Helsinki to underscore Mr. Trump's frustration with Europe that was on display this week at the NATO summit, planting the seeds of future discord. -- Arms control. Mr. Trump has been floating the idea of new arms talks with Russia, though over what isn't clear. No doubt Mr. Putin's spies have told him that Mr. Trump wants to be known as a nuclear peacemaker. And Mr. Putin may try to exploit that desire by offering a new round of talks to reduce the U.S. and Russian nuclear arsenals.
The Trump administration has been mainly focused on the strategic threat from China in recent months, but U.S. President Donald Trump is signaling that he is keeping at least one eye on Russia, the only other nation the Pentagon believes could pose an existential threat to the United States. After months of focusing on the trade war and military competition with Beijing, Trump this week moved to step up the U.S. military presence in Eastern Europe to deter Russian aggression. Trump announced plans to send an additional 1,000 troops to Poland during a joint press conference in Washington on Wednesday with Polish President Andrzej Duda. Some experts said the troop increase is less about responding to any new Russian threat and more about rewarding Poland for its commitment to security. Poland is one of just eight NATO member countries that meets the alliance commitment of spending 2 percent of GDP on defense, a key sore spot in U.S.-NATO relations under Trump. Ever since his presidential campaign, Trump has harshly criticized members for not spending enough on security, particularly Germany. The president’s announcement sends a clear political message to other NATO members who aren’t as aligned with the administration, for instance Berlin, said Jeffrey Mankoff, the deputy director of the Russia and Eurasia program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “This whole fight over 2 percent spending is central to the way that Trump looks at NATO, and because the Poles have been on the right side of that debate, this is also about rewarding them politically and making the case to others that there are benefits if you get onboard,” said Mankoff. He noted that in addition to signaling political support, an increased U.S. presence in Poland will come with an economic investment in the Eastern European nation. “Trump is trying to basically reward the Poles, punish the Germans, and the Russians are in some ways almost incidental,” he said. In any case, the additional troop presence is a far cry from establishing a permanent U.S. military base in Poland, a proposal nicknamed “Fort Trump” that was floated last year. The proposal seems to have quietly died after critics claimed it would needlessly provoke Russia. The “noncombat” troops will be mostly focused on logistics and support, the official said, stressing that their presence will not violate a 1997 security agreement that prohibits the permanent basing of NATO troops in former Warsaw Pact countries. However, it is still a clear signal that Washington is committed to keeping Moscow in check, as Russia continues to build up forces on Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula. “This is an effective use of U.S. resources and good for deterrence. We need the capability addition these guys provide and we’ve known that,” said Jim Townsend, a former senior Pentagon official. “It’s much better than ‘Fort Trump.’”
The move also underscores an apparent contrast within the Trump administration’s approach to Europe over the past two years: The president himself has railed against European allies and made warm overtures to Russian President Vladimir Putin. But his administration has taken a hard-line stance against Moscow with a raft of defense initiatives, sanctions, and diplomatic maneuvering that seem at odds with the president’s personal views on NATO. While the Pentagon has identified China as the greatest threat to the United States and its allies, Russia is a key immediate problem, said Elbridge Colby, who served as deputy assistant secretary of defense for strategy and force development until 2018. “The Russian threat, while definitely more limited and more circumscribed, is more pointed right now primarily because it’s a land border, there’s no natural topographical division between Russia and NATO territory,” said Colby, who is now at the Center for a New American Security. By contrast: “The Chinese have to launch an amphibious invasion to get after American forces or Taiwan.” Colby said the increased rotational presence may be a better fit than a large, fixed base for the threat from Russia as it appears more “combat credible.” In addition to the additional troops, the United States will establish a forward-deployed division headquarters and a combat training center, to be jointly used by Polish and U.S. forces in Drawsko Pomorskie, Poland, and eventually other locations, according to the joint resolution Trump and Duda signed on Wednesday. The United States will also stand up a U.S. Air Force surveillance squadron of MQ-9 Reaper drones and a U.S. special operations forces capability in Poland. In addition, the United States will build infrastructure to support the presence of an armored brigade combat team, a combat aviation brigade, and a combat sustainment support battalion. “The United States and Poland believe that the presence of U.S. military personnel in Poland strengthens NATO’s deterrence efforts, and the defense of the United States, Poland, and the Alliance,” the joint document states. Trump stressed during the press conference that Poland will pay for the additional U.S. presence. Citing concerns about Russia’s aggression, Poland in recent months has been pushing for an increased U.S. presence, which currently numbers around 4,500 troops deployed on a rotational basis. Since Russia invaded Ukraine and illegally annexed Crimea in 2014, NATO has increased its activities in Eastern Europe with rotating forces and military exercises in the aim of deterring Russia. Despite Trump’s misgivings about NATO—since his presidential campaign he has questioned whether the trans-Atlantic alliance is relevant or necessary—his administration has poured billions of dollars into increasing the U.S. military footprint in Europe through a multiyear program started under the Obama administration called the European Deterrence Initiative. The Pentagon requested $5.9 billion for the initiative in fiscal year 2020. Some doubted the impact extra troops would have on the stable—if tense—security situation on NATO’s eastern flank. “I don’t see the added deterrent effect of sending an extra 1,000 troops,” said Rachel Rizzo, a scholar on trans-Atlantic relations with the Center for a New American Security. “The U.S. already has rotational forces in Eastern Europe that have proven to be effective in deterring Russia.” Mankoff acknowledged that “if World War III starts in Europe,” the additional 1,000 troops “are going to be a rounding error.” However, Russia is likely concerned about the precedent set by the presence of the higher troop numbers.
Donald Trump, the president of the United States, has told the Syrian government and its Russian ally to stop bombing Syria's last rebel-held province, just as Israel launched a second round of air raids against Syria in 24 hours, according to state media. "Hearing word that Russia, Syria and, to a lesser extent, Iran, are bombing the hell out of Idlib Province in Syria, and indiscriminately killing many innocent civilians," Trump, whose administration has long supported its support for Israeli air raids in Syria, wrote in a post on Twitter. His comments came after Moscow on Friday suggested that it would continue to back a month-long Syrian government offensive in Idlib.. In a statement, the Kremlin said it was Turkey's responsibility to stop rebels in Idlib from firing on civilian and Russian targets. Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan has long complained to Moscow about the Russian-backed Syrian government attacks against rebels who control the country's northwest. The offensive in Idlib is the biggest escalation of the war between Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and rebel opponents of his government since last summer, and has raised fears of a humanitarian crisis as Syrians displaced by the fighting seek shelter at the Turkish border.
President Vladimir Putin said relations between Moscow and Washington were getting worse and worse, noting in an interview published on Thursday that the current U.S. administration had imposed dozens of sanctions on Russia. Putin made his gloomy assessment ahead of a G20 summit in Japan later this month at which he might meet U.S. President Donald Trump. U.S.-Russia ties remain strained by everything from Syria to Ukraine as well as allegations of Russian interference in U.S. politics, which Moscow denies. "They (our relations) are going downhill, they are getting worse and worse," Putin told the Mir TV channel, according to a Kremlin transcript. "The current administration has approved, in my opinion, several dozen decisions on sanctions against Russia in recent years." The Russian leader contrasted Moscow's troubled relationship with Washington with what he described as its blossoming ties with China, a deepening strategic friendship that has alarmed some U.S. policymakers. Trump told reporters on Wednesday that he would meet Putin at the G20 in Japan, but the Kremlin said a day earlier that the idea for the meeting was "hanging in the air" and that there were no discussions on specifics yet. Trump said on Wednesday he hoped the United States would have "a great relationship with Russia," but pledged to deploy 1,000 U.S. troops to Poland, a step sought by Warsaw to deter potential aggression from Russia. In another move certain to rankle with Moscow, Trump said on Wednesday he was considering sanctions over Russia's Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline project and warned Germany against being dependent on Russia for energy. Putin, who has spoken out in favour of China in its burgeoning trade war with the United States, said in the same interview that he hoped for smoother ties with Washington despite the current trajectory of their relationship. "...We really hope that common sense will prevail in the end," said Putin.
By pulling out of the INF Treaty, Trump might be handing Putin another win. On Saturday, President Donald Trump announced the United States would be pulling out of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, citing alleged Russian cheating since 2014 as the rationale. The Kremlin has responded by saying the move could ignite a new arms race. “This is a question of strategic security. Such measures can make the world more dangerous,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters on Monday. “It means that the United States is not disguising, but is openly starting to develop these systems in the future, and if these systems are being developed, then actions are necessary from other countries, in this case Russia, to restore balance in this sphere.” Former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who signed the treaty with the late American President Ronald Reagan in 1987, described Trump’s decision as “not the work of a great mind” and “very strange.” Withdrawing from the treaty satisfies the long-held agenda of National Security Advisor John Bolton, who opposes arms control on principle. The move is also in keeping with the foreign policy instincts of President Trump, who distrusts international agreements and has previously withdrawn from the Paris climate accord and the Iran nuclear deal. Although framed as a punishment of Russia, being unshackled from the INF treaty might also serve the agenda of Russian President Vladimir Putin. Writing in Slate, the journalist Fred Kaplan argues that “withdrawing would give the Russians exactly what they want. When George W. Bush was president, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov implored Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld several times to make a deal allowing both sides to get out of this treaty, which Russian officers had never liked. Rumsfeld ignored the request, knowing that there was no appetite in the U.S. or NATO for bringing back the ground-launched cruise missile or the Pershing II. In other words, a joint pullout would help only the Russians—and do nothing for the U.S. or the West. Trump is now about to commit the mistake that Rumsfeld avoided.” If America is going to pursue an arms race in Europe to counter Russian medium-range missiles, it would need buy-in from European allies. But in point of fact, the very act of pulling out of the INF treaty is adding further stress to the already tense relations America and those allies. This morning the German Foreign Office tweeted: Trump has torn up the treaty to punish Russia but there’s no evidence that the United States has a strategy to deal with a post-treaty world.
Russia has accused the US of striking a “severe blow” to European stability after Donald Trump announced he would send 1,000 troops to Poland, raising fears of a new arms race between the two military superpowers. Mr Trump’s decision to boost the US military in Poland, which has long sought a bigger Nato presence to deter any threat from Russia, comes just months after his administration pulled out of a landmark Cold War nuclear missile treaty drawn up to protect Europe from attack. Russia’s foreign ministry said on Thursday that the move was a “severe blow” to a separate 1997 deal between Russia and Nato restricting military build-up in eastern Europe and represented a “further dangerous build-up of military capabilities on the continent. The ministry’s statement said Washington had acted “without regard to obligations under multilateral instruments, and now without regard to European allies”. It added: “Such actions undermine one of the few remaining documents designed to ensure military stability in Europe” and said Russia could not “fail to take this into account in its defence planning and practical activities”. Moscow has previously warned that any increased Nato presence in Poland could prompt it to increase its own footprint in neighbouring Belarus, a Russian military ally.
The troop increase, the result of intensive negotiations between Washington and Warsaw over the past nine months, is a boost for Poland’s ruling Law and Justice party, which has clashed with Brussels in recent years and made stronger ties with the US one of its priorities. However opposition politicians have questioned the cost of the deal, and the energy deals that Poland has signed alongside it. Poland last year signed a $4.8bn deal to buy Patriot missile defence systems from the US, and last month enquired about buying F-35 fighter jets. Mariusz Blaszczak, Poland’s defence minister, visited a US air base to meet units equipped with the jets earlier this week. Mr Trump said he had arranged for an F-35 to fly over the White House while the two presidents were meeting. Poland’s geographic position on Nato’s eastern flank has made it an important ally for the US. But it has also won favour in Washington as a result of its willingness to spend heavily on defence — something Mr Trump has frequently demanded of US allies. Poland is one of the seven Nato countries to meet the bloc’s spending target of 2 per cent of GDP on defence. Warsaw has pledged to spend 185bn zloty ($48bn) by 2026 on modernising its armed forces. Jens Stoltenberg, the Nato secretary-general, said in a statement that Wednesday’s announcement “is fully in line with Nato’s international commitments. When the world changes, we have to adapt to make sure that we can continue to protect all allies.”
Canada's Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has promised to support Ukraine in the wake of Russian "aggression", after meeting Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky in Toronto. The two leaders met on Tuesday as Zelensky has been on his first visit to North America to participate in a conference on Ukrainian reforms. "In the wake of Russian aggression and attempts to undermine Ukraine's sovereignty, including the illegal annexation of Crimea, it's all the more important for countries like Canada to stand alongside its partner," said Trudeau during a press conference with Zelensky. "Russia's actions are not only a threat to Ukraine but to international law," he said. The conference, which ends on Thursday, brings together representatives from 30 countries, the European Union (EU), and international organisations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and NATO. Trudeau said he was "dismayed" that Russia was reinstated in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), after the country was stripped of its voting rights in the pan-European rights body in 2014 following the annexation of Crimea. Trudeau, Zelensky Trudeau and Zelensky discussed Canadian arms sales and military training mission in Ukraine [Lars Hagberg/AFP] Trudeau noted that the reinstatement came despite Russia "having not liberated the Ukrainian sailors" detained in the country since November 2018, as well as three Ukrainian naval vessels, which were seized in the Kerch Strait at the same time. Zelensky said he was "disappointed" by the decision of the PACE. In protest, Ukraine announced it was withdrawing its invitation to PACE monitors to observe parliamentary elections scheduled for July 21. Trudeau and Zelensky also discussed Canadian arms sales and military training mission in Ukraine. In March, Ottawa renewed its mission of about 200 Canadian troops deployed to Ukraine until the end of March 2022. Since 2015, Canada has trained nearly 11,000 Ukrainian soldiers. Regarding Ukrainian reforms, Trudeau said there has been "much improvement" in the last few years, which he believes will continue, particularly in the fight against corruption. The Canadian leader said he is convinced that with the election of Zelensky, a former comedian who took office in May, there will be "even more positive steps" in Ukraine. "We will be patient because there is a lot of work to do," Trudeau said. Canadian assistance Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland announced $45m in additional Canadian assistance to Ukraine in support of its reforms and a proposed national police force. Since 2014, Canada - the first Western country to recognise Ukraine's independence in December 1991 and home to a large Ukrainian diaspora - has provided the country more than $785m in aid. Freeland also condemned Moscow's decision to issue Russian passports to Ukrainian citizens in the Donbass region, a disputed area in eastern Ukraine controlled by pro-Russian separatists. "Starting today, Canada will take action to ensure that these passports cannot be used to travel to Canada. We encourage our partners to do likewise," she said. The armed conflict between Ukrainian forces and the pro-Russian separatists has claimed 13,000 lives since 2014.
Relations between the U.S. and Russia are at their most dangerous point in years, said a top Russian diplomat, with the two rivals locked in a stalemate over how to revive an important Cold War-era arms treaty and President Vladimir Putin blaming Washington for failing to undertake talks on new weapons pacts.
ODESSA, Ukraine -- The U.S. is channeling support to Ukraine's navy to help counter Russian efforts to choke its neighbor's economy and destabilize its pro-Western government by blocking access to ports.
Russian president Vladimir Putin warned in an interview released Thursday that Moscow’s relationship with the U.S. is “getting worse by the hour.”
Russian tycoon Oleg Deripaska, a close confidant of Russian President Vladimir Putin, said on Sunday that Moscow and Washington are more interested in “muscle flexing” than improving their relationship. Asked whether he has hopes of thawing tensions between Russia and the West while economic sanctions are in place, Deripaska replied: “The way I see it, from the U.S. side, it is impossible.” “If you look at the reality, Russian people (and) American people, they don’t hate each other,” he told CNBC’s Geoff Cutmore during an exclusive interview in Moscow. “In the heart of the Russian people, I think there is room to go and start a new page but the problem is all of this muscle flexing from both sides.” Deripaska on Friday filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Treasury Department to lift the sanctions it placed on him last year as part of a wider retaliation for Russian interference in the U.S. election and what the Treasury described as its “malign activity around the globe.” The billionaire commodities magnate claims his wealth dropped by 81 percent, or $7.5 billion, as a result of the sanctions, and that he’s become “a victim of this country’s political infighting.” His companies EN+ and Rusal, the latter of which is the world’s second biggest aluminum producer, came under sanctions as part of the U.S. measures against the Russian government in April of 2018. The lawsuit is the latest shot in a long series of provocations and flare-ups between Russia and the U.S., whose relations are seen by many as at their worst since the Cold War. ‘Are you serious?’ Deripaska told CNBC that both countries are prepared to spend trillions of dollars on defense despite that more than half of such an expenditure was likely to be “unnecessary.” When asked whether the prospect of a change of president in the U.S. next year might present an opportunity for improved ties between Washington and Moscow, Deripsaka replied: “Are you serious?” “Everything will be the same in four years,” he said. “Only a new generation will do something. This (generation) would prefer to have fighting.” Russia’s economy tanked in 2014 in part thanks to U.S. sanctions enacted over its annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula, and Russian officials regularly slam the latest slate of Treasury sanctions what they say is “anti-Russian hysteria” conjured up by the West. Moscow and Washington have been on opposing sides of a number of international conflicts, including in Syria, Ukraine, Iran, and most recently Venezuela. Earlier this month, U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo accused Russia of “standing with its Venezuelan cronies” in order to “protect a Moscow-friendly regime.” His comments came shortly after the U.S. Treasury Department imposed sanctions against Russian bank Evrofinance Mosnarbank for helping Venezuela’s state oil firm PDVSA dodge U.S. financial restrictions. Both countries have now withdrawn from an 1987 international nuclear treaty, and Putin in December warned the threat of a nuclear war should not be discounted. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov insisted that Russia does not want an “arms race,” but was ready to respond to military threats if necessary. Sanctions and more sanctions U.S. legislators have proposed new and tougher sanctions bills on Russia in recent months, drawing fierce rebuke from Russian officials who’ve called the motions “insane” and “reckless.” A bipartisan group of U.S. senators proposed a bill in February called the “Defending American Security from Kremlin Aggression Act (DASKA)” of 2019, which seeks to increase economic, political, and diplomatic pressure on Russia “in response to Russia’s interference in democratic processes abroad, malign influence in Syria, and aggression against Ukraine, including in the Kerch Strait, ” the bill’s authors said. Most recently, alongside Canada and the European Union, the U.S. Treasury Department announced on Friday it would impose sanctions against six Russians and approximately half a dozen defense firms over the November attack on Ukrainian Navy vessels and soldiers in the Kerch Strait. Deripaska’s companies were relieved of sanctions by the Trump administration in January — against Democrats’ objections — but Deripaska himself remains on the Treasury’s list of “Designated Russian Oligarchs” for allegedly acting on behalf of “a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation,” and for his operation in the Russian energy sector.
President Vladimir Putin said relations between Moscow and Washington were getting worse and worse, noting in an interview published on Thursday that the current U.S. administration had imposed dozens of sanctions on Russia. Putin made his gloomy assessment ahead of a G20 summit in Japan later this month at which he might meet U.S. President Donald Trump. U.S.-Russia ties remain strained by everything from Syria to Ukraine as well as allegations of Russian interference in U.S. politics, which Moscow denies. “They (our relations) are going downhill, they are getting worse and worse,” Putin told the Mir TV channel, according to a Kremlin transcript. “The current administration has approved, in my opinion, several dozen decisions on sanctions against Russia in recent years.” The Russian leader contrasted Moscow’s troubled relationship with Washington with what he described as its blossoming ties with China, a deepening strategic friendship that has alarmed some U.S. policymakers. Trump told reporters on Wednesday that he would meet Putin at the G20 in Japan, but the Kremlin said a day earlier that the idea for the meeting was “hanging in the air” and that there were no discussions on specifics yet. Trump said on Wednesday he hoped the United States would have “a great relationship with Russia,” but pledged to deploy 1,000 U.S. troops to Poland, a step sought by Warsaw to deter potential aggression from Russia. In another move certain to rankle with Moscow, Trump said on Wednesday he was considering sanctions over Russia’s Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline project and warned Germany against being dependent on Russia for energy. Putin, who has spoken out in favor of China in its burgeoning trade war with the United States, said in the same interview that he hoped for smoother ties with Washington despite the current trajectory of their relationship. “...We really hope that common sense will prevail in the end,” said Putin. “That with all of our partners, including our American partners ... we can reach some decisions in the framework of the forthcoming G20 that will be constructive and create the necessary stable conditions for economic cooperation.”
Outgoing U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley on Wednesday ripped Russia over its aggressive actions beyond its borders, saying it makes having a relationship with the U.S. “impossible.” “The United States wants a relationship with Russia, but as long as they keep doing the actions that they’re doing, they’re making it impossible,” Haley said in an appearance on NBC’s “Today.” She pointed at Russian aggression toward Ukraine and the poisoning of two former Russian spies in the United Kingdom as actions that can't "get a pass." “You can’t go poison someone in another country, like they did with the Skripals, and get a pass. You can’t go and invade Ukraine and think the rest of the world’s not going to notice.” While President Trump has refrained from publicly condemning Moscow over its foreign provocations, members of his administration, such as Haley, have not held back. Russia faced widespread criticism and increased sanctions after it was determined that the Kremlin ordered the poisoning of Sergei Skripal, a former Russian intelligence agent, and his daughter in March in Salisbury, England. It is also still facing reverberations from its annexation of Crimea in Ukraine in 2014, which also resulted in sanctions on officials linked to the Kremlin and the expulsion of Russia from the Group of Eight large world economies. Most recently, Moscow has faced bipartisan scrutiny over its meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, with members on both sides of the aisle on Capitol Hill accepting the intelligence community’s assessment that the Kremlin sought to influence the election in favor of President Trump while Trump himself continues to dispute those findings. Trump during the campaign vowed to work to mend relations with Russia, saying it would be a “good thing” if he and Russian President Vladimir Putin got along. A meeting between Putin and Trump last summer in Helsinki was widely panned by lawmakers and U.S. allies for his failure to publicly confront the Russian leader over Moscow's interference in the 2016 election. Just last month, the president canceled a meeting with Putin at the Group of 20 summit in Argentina due to military tensions between Moscow and Ukraine.
Don’t call it the Venezuelan Missile Crisis. In fact, Russian troops in Venezuela barely rate as a crisis at all. The Trump administration is up in arms over an estimated 100 Russian troops and military advisers that were airlifted into Venezuela in March to support the embattled government of Nicolas Maduro. “Russia’s got to leave Venezuela,” declared Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, while National Security Adviser John Bolton warned that other nations shouldn’t establish military bases in the Western Hemisphere. It is understandable that Washington would be unhappy about Moscow’s support for a regime it would like to see overthrown. Or that Venezuela has spent billions on Russian arms, including jet fighters, helicopters and anti-aircraft missiles. Or that a pair of Tu-160 nuclear bombers has flown from western Russia to a Venezuelan airfield in a symbolic display of Russian aerial might. But how big a threat to U.S. security is a handful of Russian troops permanently stationed in Venezuela? Not much. To really threaten the continental United States from Venezuela, Russia would have to be capable of projecting power 1,400 miles—the distance from Caracas to Miami—or at least far enough out to threaten shipping lanes or the Panama Canal. That would mean putting missiles or long-range bombers like the Tu-160 and Tu-22M3 in Venezuela, or shorter-range tactical jets supported by air tankers. A deployment of that size would be noticed by U.S. intelligence. No White House administration could tolerate it, especially after word inevitably leaked to Congress and the press. Venezuela as a permanent Russian naval base, like the port of Tartus in Syria, is another possibility. That is, if the Russian Navy is capable of permanently operating a squadron in the Western Hemisphere. But again, any base that could service a large number of surface ships and nuclear submarines would be intolerable to Washington. As with Cuba or Nicaragua during the Cold War, a Russian outpost in Venezuela could function as an intelligence base in Latin America, or as a staging point to foment political conflict in the region. But that’s hardly an existential threat to the United State. And even then, too active a Russian presence would only energize Americans who wouldn’t mind sending the Marines for regime change in Caracas.
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has long made the buttressing of beleaguered despots a pillar of his foreign policy — most successfully by deploying the military in Syria — to drive home the point that outside powers should not dabble in other countries’ internal affairs. On the face of it, the upheaval in Venezuela would seem to check all his boxes. Venezuela, however, is not Syria. It is separated from Russia by thousands of miles of ocean; there is no allied regional power like Iran that Moscow can rely on to do the dirty work on the ground; and with the Russian economy suffering long-term anemia, the Kremlin does not really have the means or the domestic support for another costly overseas adventure. Nevertheless, the question “What should Russia do?” is raised daily by newspaper columnists and television pundits. So far, the answer from the Kremlin seems to be that it will mostly fulminate from the sidelines and, as in every other foreign or domestic crisis, splatter blame on the United States. “We understand that, in simple words, the United States took the bit between its teeth and openly took a course toward toppling the regime” in Venezuela, Sergey V. Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, said at a news conference on Tuesday. Members of the opposition, he said, “have been ordered by Washington to make no concessions until the regime surrenders its power one way or the other.” Repeatedly offering to mediate the dispute, he said it was up to Russia and others to counter these efforts. “We and other responsible members of the international community will do everything we can to support the lawful government,” said Mr. Lavrov, ignoring the fact that Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s president, won re-election last year through what is widely regarded as massive vote fraud. Also to be found in Mr. Maduro’s camp are China, Turkey, Iran and Syria. One prominent trait they share is a fear of popular uprisings. “Politically, the Kremlin wants to insist that any political regime, even if it is catastrophically ineffective, can never be deposed by its own citizens,” said Aleksandr Morozov, a political analyst and frequent Kremlin critic. Aleksandr M. Goltz, a military analyst, echoed those sentiments while noting that the relationship with Venezuela mirrored the foreign policy of the old Soviet Union, in which the Kremlin lavished arms and money on any country that barked at Washington. “For Putin, the fight against color revolutions is a principle matter,” said Aleksandr M. Goltz, a military analyst. “It is not important where they happen, in Syria or Venezuela. Any attempt by local people to get rid of an authoritarian leader is seen by the Russian leadership as a conspiracy, masterminded by foreign intelligence.” The crisis has echoes of Cold War confrontations of old. Moscow relishes its alliance with Caracas, as Mr. Goltz put it, as “a hedgehog in America’s pants.” In December, Moscow sent two long-range bombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons to Venezuela in a show of solidarity. Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a hard-line populist and nationalist, suggested that Russia should send a whole fleet of them now to prevent outside intervention. That, in essence, would be a replay of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, when the United States and the Soviet Union appeared on the brink of nuclear war over the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba. In recent years, Russia’s state-owned oil giant, Rosneft, has taken a significant stake in Venezuela’s oil industry, and the Kremlin has supplied a considerable amount of arms on credit. With Venezuela generating more than $10 billion in debt over the past few years, Moscow would dearly like to be repaid. Dmitri S. Peskov, the presidential spokesman, denied that Russia was intervening in clandestine ways, such as supplying mercenaries to protect Mr. Maduro and perhaps important government assets. Of course, officials had denied that private Russian military contractors were working for the government of Sudan before reversing field, with the Foreign Ministry confirming those reports last week. Other analysts have suggested that there is no need for contract soldiers, because the Venezuelan military still supports Mr. Maduro. Russian officials have said repeatedly that there have been no official requests for assistance from Caracas. But no one expects a replay of Syria. Besides the geographical distance and the expense, there are several key reasons that Russia is unlikely to intervene. In Syria, Russia could fight from a distance, deploying its air force or firing cruise missiles from the Caspian Sea. Iran supplied the ground troops needed to defeat the anti-government militias. Sergey V. Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, said at a news conference on Tuesday that “the United States took the bit between its teeth and openly took a course toward toppling the regime.” Venezuela has not reached the point of war, and strategic bombers will not help deal with demonstrators, Russian commentators have noted, stressing that the Kremlin will not deploy soldiers to fight street battles against opposition protesters in Caracas or other cities. In the Middle East, Russia has other friends besides Syria. In Latin America, apart from Cuba, Nicaragua, Suriname and Bolivia, not a single government backs Mr. Maduro. Thus any Russian intervention risks alienating every government on the continent, not to mention provoking more American sanctions. Even among Russian hard-liners, there is a grudging admiration for the fact that the United States is likely to whack anyone who intervenes too openly in its back yard, with the Monroe Doctrine cited frequently. Russia’s main interest is mostly in seeing the confrontation drag on without resolution, suggested Vladimir Frolov, a foreign-policy analyst, in a commentary on Republic.ru. “It would demonstrate the failure of the American strategy of unlawful regime change and the success of the Russian line of supporting legitimate power,” he wrote. Should Mr. Maduro go down, however, other commentators suggested that despite the temptation to turn the crisis into yet another confrontation with the United States, it would probably be best just to cut him loose. “If Venezuela’s current political leader is destined to sink politically, let him sink by himself, without dragging us along,” wrote one commentator in the daily Moskovsky Komsomolets. As with Bashar al-Assad in Syria, however, the idea has been raised that perhaps Russia could defuse the crisis by offering Mr. Maduro asylum, even if that possibility seems remote. “For Maduro, who is used to palm trees,” as well as the sea and a year-round average temperature of 77 degrees, another commentator wrote in the same paper, “the cold Moscow winter is not the ideal option, but it is much better than a warm prison cell in Caracas.”
As long as there remain countries in Europe aspiring to join the European Union and NATO, the West will have a much stronger had for winning over and influencing countries on the continent. The European Union’s total distraction with Brexit and the rise of populist and anti-democratic parties, however, combined with the Trump Administration’s alienation of European allies and undermining of NATO and the EU as key institutions, weaken the West’s hand and create openings for Putin. For the West, the problem here can be found when it looks in the mirror, not in great power competition with Russia—though Putin is a skillful opportunist who taps into our self-inflicted wounds and exacerbates them. In response to all this, the Administration unwisely overlooks problems in parts of Europe and the Middle East because it views relations through the prism of great power competition. It has gone completely quiet amid democratic rollback in Hungary and Poland, and it has even supported far-right and populist forces in Italy, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo had no business visiting Budapest last month, unless he was there to read the riot act to Putin pal Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s Prime Minister. Instead of bolstering our allies in Europe, we are contributing to their problems and have been complicit in their undermining of democratic institutions. By looking the other way amid authoritarian moves in certain EU member states, we blur the distinction between us and Putin’s unprincipled approach. Standing up for our values would go much further to bolster Europe and our friends in the Middle East as well as deflect Putin’s efforts there. Syria is another example of Putin’s misguided power projection. His decision to send Russian forces to Syria in late September 2015 undoubtedly saved Assad, who was teetering on the edge at that time. Putin stepped in where the Obama administration failed to act. Assad is still in power and talk of his departure has largely disappeared. But Russia now owns responsibility for keeping Assad, who has the blood of hundreds of thousands on his hands, in power. Between 200 and 300 Russian mercenaries in Syria were killed by U.S. airpower more than a year ago, and Russia never raised a stink about it, knowing they would lose any further showdowns there on the ground. Russian diplomacy seeks to make additional inroads in the Middle East, with ties improving with Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and most notably Turkey, a NATO member. Beyond arms sales, however, Moscow has little to offer these countries. The general disengagement of the United States from the region and our abandonment of human rights concerns in the face of brutal leaders in Cairo and Riyadh make Putin’s job easier and risk alienating the frustrated populations in the region, who see little difference between our approach and that of Putin. In Venezuela, Moscow is propping up another murderous leader in Maduro. But Venezuela, far from Russia, is not the same as Syria, where Putin’s forces have greater ability to project power. Putin cannot resist trying to stick America in the eye in the Western Hemisphere, as a turnabout-is-fair-play for his sense that we have been doing that to him in his “near abroad.” But Russia is not a decisive player in Venezuela—unless we wrongly elevate it into such a role. Adamantly averse to regime change amid color revolutions in Ukraine and Georgia and the removal of Qaddafi in Libya in 2011 for fear that such change might give his own population ideas, Putin is content to align himself with like-minded, bloody, authoritarian leaders. That should make any sense of competition between the United States and Putin’s Russia easier for us, if we consistently make it clear that we stand with democratic forces and human rights and the rights of states to choose their own way forward, not with bloodthirsty dictators.
The Russian Reliance on Ukrainian Military Technology One of the major difficulties of the Russian military stance towards Ukraine has been the fact that the most developed facilities for military production were located in Ukraine. The Russian Army had been starved of new equipment for over twenty years, and much of what it had available was built in Ukraine. Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “is the most advanced and developed branch of the state’s sector of economy.” [Ukraine Intelligence & Security Activities and Operations Handbook, Vol. 1: Strategic Information and Regulations; IBP, Inc., November 29, 2017]. There are about 85 scientific organizations specialized in the development of armaments and military equipment, along with an air and space complex, and research, design and development institutes to design and build modern ships and armaments for the Ukrainian Navy. This includes the ability to design and build heavy cruisers, missile cruisers and anti-submarine warfare (ASW) cruisers. Ukraine’s military industrial complex, in conjunction with numerous scientific research institutes and scientific-industrial corporations, has the capacity to develop and produce substantial small arms, communications and automated control systems, intelligence and radio-electronic warfare equipment, and engineer equipment and materiel. Perhaps the best example is the company Motor Sich. It has been the sole producer of engines for the MI-8 and MI-24 helicopters. It produced these engines for the Russian helicopter industry and a wide range of other military components. The air firm Antonov is based in Ukraine and is one of the major suppliers of aircraft for the Russian Air Force and for Russian arms exports. The ability of the Russian industry to fill its own needs is compounded by the fact that it needs Ukrainian parts and subassemblies for its exports and consumption. Losing control of the Eastern Ukraine has jeopardised Moscow’s ability to fulfill multibillion-dollar international contracts without Ukrainian inputs. Antonov also supplies the engines for the jointly-produced AN-148 planes. Ukraine and Russia had plans to produce 150 planes of this type worth $4.5 billion. Other exporters to Russia include Mykolayiv-based Zorya-Mashproekt, which sells several types of turbines to Russia, including those installed on military ships. Another is Kharkiv-based Haroun, which supplies the control systems for Russian missiles. The volume of Russian imports of major conventional weapons in 2009-2013 was 176 percent higher than for the previous five-year period of 2004-2008. The Yasumasa plant in Dnipropetrovsk is the only service provider for Satan missiles that Russia uses. The Ukrainians are also the main supplier of spare parts which its armed forces desperately need. Russia is scrambling to supply domestic factories with the technology needed to produce these components inside Russia. However, much of the higher inputs of technology, especially in the electromechanical area, are sourced in France, Germany, Britain and the U.S., now effectively closed off to Russia by sanctions. Despite efforts by Russian troops in the Eastern Ukraine, many of the existing plants were attacked and damaged by the rebels of Donetsk and Lugansk. Additionally, the skill set of the Russian factories has been degraded by the demographic crisis of Russia and an ageing population. Russia did not have the capacity to replicate the Ukrainian military-industrial complex inside the Russian borders overnight, despite its bluff and bluster to the contrary. When the Ukrainian government decreed that it was banning all military sales to Russia, it was a challenge to President Vladimir Putin and Russia’s generals. Where would they get the turbines for their ships, the missiles for their launchers, the transport aircraft for their soldiers, the engines for their helicopters, their spare parts, et al.? The Russian government tallied up the costs of modernizing its aging military forces equipment and concluded that it would total about $800 billion. Vladimir Putin had campaigned for the presidency by calling for a rejuvenated Russian military. He published an article in Rosicky Gazeta outlining the massive spending he was intending to pursue in building up the armed forces. Unfortunately, Russia didn’t have the money, and arms manufacturers were in no position to use the funds even if they got them, owing to their state of dereliction and the disappearance of skilled workers in the machine-tool industry.
Not only was supply a problem, there were serious problems with quality. For example, Uralvagonzavod, the country’s only tank manufacturer is a good case. Putin himself bowed to army pressure to place an order for 2,300 tanks to be built over the next 10 years, despite a statement by General Staff head Nikolai Makarov that the military would not be purchasing any tanks in the next five years due to their substandard quality. In an article in RIA Novosti on 15 March 2012, Ground Forces Chief Col. Gen. Alexander Postnikov said that the most advanced weapon systems manufactured for Russia’s ground forces are below NATO, and even Chinese standards, and are expensive: “The weapon models that are manufactured by our industry, including armour, artillery and small arms and light weapons, fail to meet the standards that exist in NATO and even China.” He said that Russia’s most advanced tank, the T-90, was in fact a modification of the Soviet-era T-72 tank [entered production in 1971] but cost 118 million rubles (over $4 million) per unit. “It would be easier for us to buy three Leopards [Germany’s main battle tanks] with this money,” Postnikov said. Military modernisation was Russia’s key priority, but it was made infinitely more challenging by the loss of Ukrainian facilities, technology and skilled workers and, of course, international sanctions. President Putin has consistently promised more funds for this endeavour, but has been hampered by several key problems, some of which he cannot control.
For years, Russia has been in the midst of a demographic crisis – and it might be getting worse. There was a 5.4% decline in the birth rate between 2017 and 2018. Up until last year, the population has been holding somewhat steady, but the low birth rate, coupled with low immigration, made 2018 the first year there was a population decline in absolute terms. Global tables of male life expectancy put Russia in about the 160th place, below Bangladesh. Russia has the highest rate of absolute population loss in the world. The Russian population is ageing, and Russia remains in the throes of a catastrophic demographic collapse. The population is expected to fall to 139 million by 2031 and could shrink 34 per cent to 107 million by 2050. Russia is suffering from a mass emigration of its populace, especially among the educated. According to the State Statistics Service (SSS), approximately 4.5 million people moved out of Russia between 1989 and 2014. The smallest outflow occurred in 2009 when just 32,500 people emigrated, but the numbers began rising again after 2011, and in 2014 once again reached 1995 levels. The situation has gotten significantly worse. “Russian government statistics show a sharp upturn in emigration over the last four years … Almost 123,000 officially departed in 2012, rising to 186,000 in 2013, and accelerating to almost 309,000 in 2014 after the annexation of Crimea and even more in 2015.” [viii] It isn’t only the educated and the young who are leaving Russia. Their money is leaving even faster. According to expert estimates, for all the years, about $ 3 trillion has been exported abroad. “The net outflow of private sector capital from Russia in January-February 2019 amounted to $ 18.6 billion, which is 2.1 times more than the figure for the same period last year – $ 8.7 billion”, the Russian Central Bank reports. According to Bloomberg’s estimates, over the past 25 years, about $ 750 billion have been taken out to offshore jurisdictions from Russia. Calculations of the MGIMO professor Valentin Katasonov show that about $ 3 trillion were withdrawn from the country since the collapse of the USSR.[ix] Bloomberg Economics calculations suggest some $750 billion in Russian assets moved offshore over the last 25 years. The bleeding appears to have slowed, though it’s unclear if this reflects tighter controls and mounting geopolitical risk, or if the flows have simply been getting harder to track.[x]
Russia, by contrast, is not a great power by most major measurements, except when it comes to its nuclear arsenal and its geographical size. Russia’s GDP is less than $1.6 trillion, placing it between Spain and Italy in country rankings. Compare that to China, with a GDP of nearly $13 trillion, or to the United States, with a GDP of more than $19 trillion. Russia’s economy is stagnant, and its population is declining; the economies and populations in both the United States and China are growing. Under different leadership, Russia could be doing better, but under Vladimir Putin, Russia is stuck playing the spoiler role on the international stage. Declining powers can pose serious dangers, and Putin’s Russia is no exception. That said, in portraying Russia as a great power and placing it alongside China, the Trump Administration and commentators inflate Russia’s importance and role in the world. To be clear, the Putin regime should be taken seriously, but not as a great power. Instead it should be viewed as a destructive force wreaking havoc around the world, through use of military force, interference in others’ politics, and spread of corruption. Putin poses a grave threat to many American interests, as evidenced by: his interference in our election in 2016; his invasion and occupation of parts of Ukraine and Georgia; his bloody intervention to save the murderous Assad regime in Syria; and his most recent deployment of a small contingent of forces to Venezuela to blunt any possible U.S. military moves to remove the discredited Nicolas Maduro from power. Unlike the Chinese Communist Party, which seeks to project a positive image of its leadership and model around the world, the Kremlin more or less has abandoned efforts to boost its image. RT and Sputnik, its propaganda outlets, are more interested in denigrating other countries and their governments than they are in extolling the advantages of the Putin model. Western leaders, in other words, are in no position to hector Russia about human rights abuses, use of military force, and corruption—we are all guilty! These are not the makings of a great power but of a destructive one. In pursuing such a strategy, Putin has weakened Russian national interests and spread his forces thin in ways that leave them vulnerable. Take Ukraine, where Putin has arguably done more to unite that country than any Ukrainian leader in the past two decades. After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, a majority of Ukrainians favored joining NATO; in the past, that number was stuck in the low teens. Putin seems to have no clue how to withdraw his forces from Ukraine’s Donbas region, as Ukrainian forces have courageously staved off further territorial encroachment by Russia Other neighboring states, especially Belarus, are increasingly nervous about possible next moves by Putin. Instilling fear in one’s neighbors is one way, albeit an incredibly negative one, to project power, but it is not the sign of a great power. With his ratings in Russia dropping to levels not seen in close to a decade, Putin is not dealing from a position of strength. A Putin feeling desperate may well pose a threat, but out of weakness, not greatness.
The out-of-control corruption of all three branches of government has long since created a lack of faith by foreign investors and massive migration of productive citizens out of Ukraine. Mr. Zelensky is one of the intellectuals that has not left his country in what is being referred to as the brain drain. He is staying for the fight. But the problem is far more severe than loss of intellectuals, as this migration includes hard-working Ukrainian citizens who want to raise their families in a stable environment. The United States needs to help Ukraine get back on its feet through oversight of the anti-corruption organizations that were created. The National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine (NABU), which was supposed to fight corruption, was co-opted by Mr. Poroshenko to attack his political enemies. To stop an issue like this arising we cannot trust the government to regulate itself. Instead, there needs to be foreign oversight to ensure something like this does not happen again. NABU, a Western-created agency, was considered trustworthy and above suspicion, but it became involved in the biggest scandal of the Poroshenko presidency. In 2016 it removed several companies which had connections to Ukrainian officials from a list of suspicious entities involved in military procurement. According to investigations by Ukrainian journalists, Ihor Hladkovskiy, the son of the deputy secretary of the National Security and Defense Council, Oleh Hladkovskiy, was a direct participant in “schemes in the millions” that stole money from Ukraine’s defense industry complex and illegally profited from the war. They organized contraband imports of Russian parts for Ukrainian military hardware, and then sold them at highly inflated prices to the armed forces. In the words of opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko, the army was robbed by Mr. Poroshenko. Volunteer battalions fighting on the frontline against the separatists were forced to buy equipment — including Kalashnikovs and armored personnel carriers — from shadowy private firms like Techimpex, which had evident connections to Ukrainian officials. The Poroshenko government was profiteering through inflating the price of arms. Without foreign oversight, corruption cannot be stopped as the rich and powerful in Ukraine will always put their interests ahead of the nation’s. Mr. Zelensky is looking to bring Ukraine into the European Union and NATO. This will not be possible until the nation’s many internal problems are fixed. He is on the right track, but he needs help. The citizens are overwhelmingly behind him; corruption fighter and former governor of Odessa, Mikheil Saakashvili, is returning to Ukraine to assist Mr. Zelensky. Also returning is Oleksandr Onyshchenko, a current and hopefully future member of the Ukrainian Parliament, whistleblower, and author of the book “Peter the Fifth,” which is a personal account of the corrupt dealings within the Poroshenko administration. A prominent businessman in Ukraine, Oleksandr Onyshchenko was forced to leave Ukraine after accusing President Petro Poroshenko of pervasive corruption and making his mark as a staunch opposition supporter. Charges and arrest warrants were issued as a result of Mr. Onyshchenko revealing audiotapes that exposed high level corruption in Mr. Poroshenko’s inner circle. NABU agents demanded a bribe in the form of a stake in his company worth $150 million in return for dropping the charges. Mr. Onyshchenko’s recent comment “We cannot fail this time” is on target. This may be Ukraine’s last chance to get it right. For years the Poroshenko administration looted Ukraine of its financial resources. On the low side, Transparency International UK ranks Ukraine 120th out of 180 countries for corruption. Backing up his words, during the 2019 Ukrainian election, Mr. Onyshchenko posted a one-million Ukrainian hryvnia (approximately $37,000 U.S.) prize to the journalistic investigation that would bring the Poroshenko administration to justice. Ukraine’s population and reformist leaders are taking a stand to fix their country. They need the help of the European Union and the United States, starting with investigative support concerning how much money was laundered and where it is hidden now. This will be the first step in recovering as much of the embezzled money as possible and bringing the criminals to trial. Establishing financial stability, reforming a corrupt government, applying the rule of law and national security can be achieved. The Zelensky administration, the Ukrainian people, the European Union and the United States all have a stake in Mr. Onyshchenko’s assessment: “We cannot fail this time.”
At their April meeting to mark NATO’s 70th anniversary, NATO foreign ministers noted their commitment to the alliance’s “open door” policy for countries that aspire to membership. Russian aggression over the past five years has only solidified domestic support within Ukraine for membership, though the path to achieving that objective faces serious obstacles. GROWING SUPPORT FOR NATO IN UKRAINE When NATO leaders in July 1997 invited Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary to join the alliance, they also stated the “open door” policy. That reaffirmed Article 10 of the Washington Treaty that established NATO, which reads in part: “The Parties may, by unanimous agreement, invite any other European state in a position to further the principles of this Treaty and to contribute to the security of the North Atlantic area to accede to this Treaty.” President Leonid Kuchma publicly declared Ukraine’s interest in NATO membership in May 2002. Washington expressed support while noting that Kyiv had to do its homework, that is, it had to adopt the kinds of democratic, economic, and military reforms that the alliance asked of other aspirants. During the remainder of Kuchma’s time in office, however, Ukraine made little tangible progress in those areas. In 2006, President Victor Yushchenko attached high priority to securing a NATO membership action plan (MAP). By summer, Kyiv looked on course to attain a MAP when alliance foreign ministers met that December. Curiously, Moscow did not come out hard against the idea. The prospective MAP derailed, however, after Yushchenko appointed Victor Yanukovych as prime minister. During a September visit to Brussels, Yanukovych said he did not want a MAP. The proposal died given the divided position of Ukraine’s executive branch. Yushchenko called for a MAP again in January 2008, this time with the support of Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko and Rada (parliament) Speaker Arseniy Yatseniuk. Moscow came out in full opposition. When Yushchenko visited the Russian capital that February, he had to stand alongside and listen to President Vladimir Putin threaten to target nuclear missiles on Ukraine. Instead of lobbying allies to support a MAP for Kyiv, Washington waited until the April Bucharest summit, where President George W. Bush attempted to persuade his counterparts to grant Ukraine (and Georgia) a MAP. However, a number of allied leaders by then had made up their minds and opposed the idea. Concern about Russian opposition undoubtedly played a role.
The 20th anniversary of a landmark U.S. foreign policy initiative has slipped by virtually unnoticed. In 1999, NATO began its post-Cold War expansion into Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, taking on three new members: Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. Last month, the alliance rather quietly marked that event — as well as the 70th anniversary of its founding — at a meeting of foreign ministers in Washington, rather than a heads-of-state gathering that the occasion seemed to merit. This was no accident, given the near-certainty that President Donald Trump would have spoiled any NATO summit he attended. It was also a pity, because NATO expansion ranks as one of the great U.S. foreign policy successes of the post-Cold War era. This is not the conventional wisdom. Critics of U.S. foreign policy, particularly those who hail from the “realist” school of international relations, consider NATO expansion a fateful, even tragic error. NATO had lost its purpose after the Cold War ended, they claim; it should have been disbanded or, at best, frozen in amber. But instead, it marched steadily eastward, snapping up former Warsaw Pact members and eventually former Soviet republics Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. This aggressive policy ultimately exhausted Russian patience, triggering Moscow’s wars against Georgia and Ukraine and driving the renewed confrontation between the Kremlin and the West. In 2014, University of Chicago professor John Mearsheimer put NATO expansion front and center in arguing that Russia’s annexation of Crimea was actually the West’s fault. Yet the Mearsheimer of 2014 would have done well to acquaint himself with the Mearsheimer of 1990. That year, he wrote a widely read essay predicting that post-Cold War Europe would become an anarchic hellscape. Russia and Germany would compete viciously for influence. Countries would race to arm themselves; nuclear proliferation would run rampant. The Cold War had been a sort of vacation from history, Mearsheimer suggested. With that conflict over, the continent would be thrust back into its violent past. This didn’t happen, of course. Even accounting for the Balkan civil wars of the 1990s and Russian aggression more recently, Europe made remarkable strides toward democracy and stability, and there was zero nuclear proliferation. Europe moved forward, not backward, and NATO expansion was a critical reason why. For one thing, NATO expansion kept America in Europe. When the Cold War ended, many observers predicted that the U.S. would withdraw, as it had done after World War I. Yet expanding NATO gave the alliance — and America’s role in it — new purpose. The U.S. did not again retreat across the ocean, leaving turmoil and seething rivalry in its wake. It recommitted to playing its stabilizing role not just in Western Europe but across the continent. Second, NATO expansion kept the German problem solved. A great fear of the early 1990s was that a reunified and independent Germany, no longer hemmed in by NATO on one side and the Warsaw Pact on the other, would return to its predatory ways. Instead, the U.S. ensured that it remained closely tethered to NATO, surrounded by allied states, and thoroughly pacified. To hear U.S. officials complain today that Germany has become too demilitarized, that it does not behave assertively enough, is to understand just how completely this mission succeeded. Third, NATO expansion kept the demons at bay in Eastern Europe. It was not foolish to fear trouble there in the early 1990s. Ethnic tensions were on the rise; many former Soviet allies harbored revisionist territorial claims. There was no shortage of underemployed scientists who might have helped Poland or other vulnerable states build the bomb. But NATO wrapped its security blanket around the former Warsaw Pact nations, committing them to accepting their existing frontiers, giving them the protection that allowed them to forego nuclear weapons, and creating the climate of reassurance in which democratic and economic reforms could occur. A reinvigorated NATO even provided stability beyond its own boundaries, intervening to stop ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia. Finally, NATO expansion was a crucial hedge against the failure of Russian reform and integration. U.S. officials wanted to foster a democratic Russia that would join the West and remain at peace with its neighbors. This is why they bent over backward throughout the 1990s to give President Boris Yeltsin the benefit of the doubt. Yet Washington also had to reckon with the dangers that might reemerge if liberalization failed and a more aggressive Russia reemerged. This is precisely what eventually happened — but in the intervening years, NATO expansion had moved the dividing line between Moscow and the West much farther to the east, and given many of Russia’s neighbors the security guarantees that still help them keep the Kremlin at bay. Putin’s Russia has invaded and mutilated two countries — Ukraine and Georgia — that are not NATO members. It has coerced and intimidated, but not invaded, any country that belongs to the alliance. As for the critique that it was NATO expansion that provoked Russian revisionism, this argument has always been flimsy. Yes, the expansion angered Russian officials, during Yeltsin’s time as well as Putin’s. It was undoubtedly humiliating for the fallen superpower. But the idea that NATO expansion caused Russian aggression rests on an implicit counterfactual argument that, absent NATO expansion, Russia would not have behaved in a domineering fashion toward countries on its border. There is simply nothing in Russian history — and nothing in Vladimir Putin’s personality — that supports this argument. The process of NATO expansion was never perfect. The alliance took on new members without considering, early or seriously enough, how it would actually defend Poland or the Baltic states from a resurgent Russia. There are legitimate debates about whether seeking to include Ukraine and Georgia in the alliance was a step too far; it is surely true that the alliance’s public announcement in 2008 that these countries would someday — but not anytime soon — join NATO was enough to anger Putin, but not to deter him. And currently, certain gains of NATO expansion are in doubt, due to resurgent illiberalism in Eastern Europe and the security challenges Russia once again poses. On the whole, however, NATO expansion was a remarkable success, one that locked in the gains of the Cold War in Europe and helped free the continent from an ugly past it might otherwise have been doomed to repeat. It’s a shame that the looming threat posed by a president who is himself blind to the alliance’s accomplishments prevents us from more clearly recognizing that result today.
The war in eastern Ukraine is the country’s most high profile crisis. But it is also battling another major, but much less visible, catastrophe: the large scale emigration overseas of its workforce. This loss of human capital threatens Ukraine’s economic development, its continued democratic consolidation and even its future stability. This “brain drain” is a serious challenge that must be addressed if the country is ever to thrive. But can new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, and his proposed reforms aimed at tackling corruption offer hope? The flight of highly skilled professionals from developing countries is a widespread and devastating problem. Research shows that it can damage the economy, trigger sociopolitical instability, and lead to weak institutions. Meanwhile, it has been shown that corruption is one of the biggest drivers of skilled migrants from developing to developed countries. In Ukraine, much of the brain drain can be traced to a lack of job opportunities, the ongoing war in the Donbas region, and the failure of the country’s politicians to rein in corruption. Indeed, some studies suggest that it is one of the main problems facing modern Ukraine. Despite the impact of this human capital flight, the country’s political elite has long overlooked the phenomenon. Proposed action by Zelensky, however, seems to offer a glimmer of hope for the country’s beleaguered youth. According to a Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS) poll, Zelensky was by far the most popular presidential candidate among the country’s youngest voters (those aged 18-29). His victory, then, may do much to keep the country’s young talent in Ukraine, and may also encourage those who have already migrated to return. Read more: Ukraine: with parliament dissolved, new president must now get serious – here's how Ukrainians living abroad clearly feel strongly about their homeland. In fact, a recent survey of Ukraine’s migrant workers revealed that 60% want to go back home. This is only likely to happen, however, if they feel that meaningful improvements have been made and there are opportunities waiting for them on their return. While the new administration’s ability to make this possible will only become apparent with time, Zelensky’s team has put forward a number of reforms specifically aimed at tackling corruption that are especially popular among the country’s young adults. The proposed reforms also carry important implications for Ukraine’s attractiveness to foreign and domestic investors. The reform agenda Corruption is a major issue in Ukraine and has been one of the main factors in driving skilled workers out and impeding the country’s attractiveness to foreign investors. The new administration promises to tackle the issue by first and foremost abolishing MPs’ parliamentary immunity from prosecution. This has traditionally been one of the major factors driving political corruption. The move would be an important first step in improving Ukraine’s image and creating a more hospitable climate for meaningful economic development. Zelensky is hugely popular among Ukraine’s young. Shutterstock The judiciary is also in major need of reform – and Zelensky’s team has highlighted that cleaning it up is a top priority. The new administration appears to be deeply aware of the need for these reforms if Ukraine is to grow economically and develop closer relationships with the West. Zelensky has also declared that his team is ready to investigate the controversial ruling of Ukraine’s highest court on the issue of illicit enrichment. Specifically, the ruling deemed that a law on illicit enrichment violated presumption of innocence and was therefore removed from the criminal code. The court’s decision was viewed both in Ukraine and internationally as a major setback for the country’s efforts to abolish corruption, and led to widespread public disapproval of former president Petro Poroshenko. Zelensky has promised to maintain the country’s course towards NATO and European Union (EU) membership, a clear sign that he wishes to appeal to young talent and overseas investors. Indeed, even before winning the election, Zelensky recognised brain drain as a significant problem, which he hopes to tackle through reforms that could help make Ukraine less corrupt and more prosperous. If successful, there is a real chance that the country’s youngest voters will be inclined to stay and contribute to Ukraine’s long-term development. But the new administration needs to move quickly and deliver on its campaign promises in order to set the tone for the rest of Zelensky’s presidential term. So far, the proposed reforms aimed at purging corruption and fostering a more favourable investment climate, paired with young voters’ enthusiasm for the new president are cause for optimism – although former comedian Zelensky’s political credentials remain to be seen. Either way, millions will now be hoping that this optimism is realised in the long run.
The Trump administration has decided to authorize the sale of lethal military assistance to Ukraine, including sniper rifles. There are significant downsides to arming Ukraine in this way, particularly fracturing consensus within NATO and provoking escalation by Russia. To reduce the risk of these negative repercussions and take the sting out of this major policy shift, the United States ought to lead NATO in admitting it made a mistake when it prematurely declared in 2008 that Ukraine (and Georgia) would become members of the alliance. Tying these two policies together will avoid the downsides associated with opening up the arms trade spigot while simultaneously strengthening the West’s position vis-à-vis Moscow. Much has been made of Moscow’s longstanding opposition to NATO enlargement into Eastern Europe. Some have even blamed this policy for Russia’s invasions of Georgia in 2008 and of Ukraine in 2014. The notion that Moscow is threatened by NATO membership for former Warsaw Pact countries — or, in the case of the Baltic States, former constituent republics of the Soviet Union — is at once understandable and ludicrous. On the one hand, Russian leaders have long equated space with security, given Russia’s unfavorable natural borders. The perceived “loss” of territory through the demise of the Warsaw Pact and the breakup of the Soviet Union is a source of legitimate anxiety within Russia as well as an instrument employed by the Kremlin to stoke nationalism and promote loyalty. On the other hand, from 1990 until very recently, NATO was effectively defanged through bilateral or multilateral treaties, unilateral military cuts across the entire alliance, and a shift in emphasis toward lighter, more expeditionary professional military forces. For instance, through the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty, the West essentially eliminated any potential for a surprise conventional attack through the heart of central Europe. Meanwhile, unilateral decisions on the part of the most capable NATO allies — especially the United States — to cash in on the peace dividend resulted in dramatic military force structure cuts in Europe. Across the entire alliance, military capabilities and strength have had dropped dramatically over the last 25 years, to the point that calling NATO a “threat” to Russia is objectively laughable. Nonetheless, when the alliance declared at the Bucharest Summit in April 2008 that Georgia and Ukraine “will become members of NATO” — even though the two countries were nowhere near ready for membership — it evidently went farther than Moscow was willing to tolerate. The prospect of losing some of its last remaining buffers against the West was too great of a risk for Russia, for reasons both international and domestic. The Kremlin’s preference for its own sphere of influence in Eastern Europe — and the domestic political imperatives shaping those preferences — ran headlong into the West’s commitment to sovereignty and self-determination. Thanks at least in part to NATO’s premature membership commitment to Ukraine and Georgia — and knowing that NATO is very reluctant to admit new members that have unresolved territorial issues with neighboring countries —the Kremlin has been strongly incentivized to create frozen conflicts in those countries. The Russian invasions of Georgia and Ukraine — and its subsequent occupation of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia and Crimea and the Donbas in Ukraine — have been the logical result. By creating and now maintaining open-ended territorial conflicts with both Georgia and Ukraine, the Kremlin has cast a de facto veto over any attempt on the part of Tbilisi or Kyiv to join NATO. Now, the West ought to admit it made a mistake and hence eliminate the inevitability of alliance membership for Georgia and Ukraine, while acknowledging that NATO’s door remains open. By declaring that these countries — or any other country — will inevitably become a member of the alliance, NATO has incentivized Moscow’s destabilizing behavior. Admitting that the 2008 declaration was premature won’t make Russia immediately withdraw its forces from Georgia and Ukraine, but it will achieve several other important objectives. First, it will put the cart of alliance membership once again behind the horse of defense reform in Georgia and Ukraine. The Bucharest declaration fundamentally short-circuited the membership process, which requires prospective members to implement an array of military and political reforms through a Membership Action Plan. A promise of eventual membership lets Georgia and Ukraine off the hook too easily. Additionally, it paradoxically undermines the very self-determination that lies at the core of Western values by pulling countries into NATO that may lack a domestic political consensus about joining the alliance. Second, NATO’s admission would undermine Kremlin rhetoric that the alliance is aggressively pulling Georgia and Ukraine in and that NATO seeks to encircle Russia through some reincarnated containment policy. Finally, declaring the 2008 promise a mistake would remove a major thorn in relations between Russia and the alliance. Some in Moscow may only be satisfied with a NATO declaration that Eastern Europe constitutes a Russian sphere of influence, or at least a zone of permanently neutral states. NATO’s admission of its mistake won’t — and can’t — go that far, but it would nevertheless remove some of the tension surrounding this issue. Satisfying Russia’s demands cannot be the primary rationale for such a move by NATO, and the alliance must be clear that even as it acknowledges its error, it will never allow 19th century great power politics to override sovereign self-determination in Europe. Pairing an admission of a mistake in 2008 with increased military aid and assistance would clearly indicate that the alliance is unwilling to let Russia carve out a sphere of influence. Increased military assistance from the United States is an unmistakable sign that the West is intent on ensuring Ukrainians can choose their own path. Another benefit of this approach would be indicating to Kyiv and Tbilisi that while the West may be abandoning the inevitability of their membership in NATO, it is not abandoning them. Instead, it’s making a tangible, useful contribution to their continued sovereignty and independence in a way that’s far more impactful in the short run than a rhetorical commitment to a membership invitation that lacks the assurance of Article 5. Moreover, the admission of an error in 2008 can help temper the damage that increased U.S. military assistance to Ukraine might to do to intra-alliance consensus. Allied agreement on the approach toward Russia’s invasion and dismemberment of Ukraine is critical, and any unilateral effort by Washington to provide more lethal aid to Kyiv is likely to challenge that consensus. Even though German Chancellor Angela Merkel may be more open to the idea of providing lethal defensive aid to Ukraine, her likely partners in a grand coalition — the Social Democrats — are probably unwilling to consider this. Many in Germany and elsewhere in Europe who continue to view Russia as a necessary part of European security are likely to see balance in an approach that ties more lethal aid for Ukraine to a loosening of NATO’s premature commitment to Ukrainian membership. The 2008 declaration that Georgia and Ukraine would eventually become members of NATO may have inadvertently painted a bull’s eye on both countries as far as the Kremlin was concerned, and it’s become an albatross of strategic significance around the alliance’s neck. By providing lethal defensive arms to Ukraine while also saying NATO won’t pull Ukraine into the alliance as soon as the separatists are defeated, the West has the chance to get Ukraine at least back to where it was in the immediate wake of the Orange Revolution. That is, the West can help Ukraine return to being mostly free of Moscow’s yoke, largely able to determine its own destiny, and cordial toward the West, but without a free admission ticket to NATO. Acknowledging that the Bucharest declaration was premature while simultaneously offering more lethal military assistance to Ukraine won’t result in an immediate rapprochement between Russia and West. However, linking these two policies is a sensible alternative to simply sending more weapons to Ukraine while continuing to ensure NATO’s door remains open.
Some terrible foreign policy ideas seem to have eternal life. One example is the proposal to expand NATO yet again by offering membership to Georgia and Ukraine. That campaign has gone on for more than a decade and is a significant factor in the West’s deteriorating relations with Russia. George W. Bush’s administration apparently decided that the United States and its European allies had not provoked Russia sufficiently with the first two rounds of NATO expansion. U.S. leaders adopted that attitude even though the second round in 2004 added the three Baltic republics, which had been part of the defunct Soviet Union itself. The administration now pushed hard to make certain that Ukraine and Georgia received membership invitations. Washington’s key European allies began to balk, however. France, Germany, and most of Washington’s other long-standing Alliance partners were unwilling to take that step when Bush formally proposed the first stage in the admission process, a Membership Action Plan (MAP), for both countries, at the April 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest, Romania. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice recalled that German Chancellor Angela Merkel was especially negative. Merkel “did not trust the Georgians, whom she still saw as corrupt.” The German leader also observed that Ukraine’s governing coalition “was a mess.” Although the primary reason for Western European reluctance was the unsatisfactory domestic political and economic situations in both countries, there also was uneasiness that another stage of NATO expansion would damage already delicate relations with Russia. Despite the intra-Alliance resistance to the Bush administration’s campaign to offer MAPs to Kiev and Tbilisi, though, the outcome of the Bucharest summit was not a total defeat for U.S. ambitions. The summit’s final declaration stated that “NATO welcomes Ukraine’s and Georgia’s Euro Atlantic aspirations for membership in NATO. We agreed today that these countries will become members of NATO.” There was no timetable but the ultimate outcome seemed clear. The Kremlin’s anger threatened to boil over at this point, and Moscow’s push back began. Even before the issuance of final declaration, Vladimir Putin bluntly warnedsummit attendees that “The emergence of a powerful military bloc at our borders will be seen as a direct threat to Russian security.” The country’s deputy foreign minister, Alexander Grushko, stated that NATO membership for Georgia and Ukraine would be “a huge strategic mistake” causing the “most serious consequences” for European peace and security. Germany, France, and other key European allies became even warier of provoking the Kremlin when war broke out between Georgia and Russia in August 2008. Initial condemnations of “Russian aggression” faded as evidence emerged that Tbilisi had initiated the military phase of the crisis. The reluctance of “Old Europe,” (Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld’s dismissive label) to offer NATO membership to Georgia and Ukraine has diminished little since that time. That is especially true since the onset of the Ukraine crisis in 2014 France has been adamant in its opposition. Then-French President Francois Hollande candidly told a press conference in Paris on February 5, 2015, that Ukraine’s NATO membership would be “undesirable” for France. “We must state it clearly, we should tell other countries the truth, including about what we are not ready to accept. This is the position of France.” Hollande reiterated these sentiments at the NATO summit in Warsaw, Poland, the following year: “NATO has no role at all to be saying what Europe’s relations with Russia should be. For France, Russia is not an adversary, not a threat.” German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier was hardly any more receptive to making Ukraine a NATO member, stating: “I see a partner relationship between Ukraine and NATO, but not membership.” Wolfgang Ischinger, chairman of the Munich Security Conference and member of the Yalta European Strategy Conference Board, concluded in September 2017: “I cannot see any possibility on the horizon for all NATO members to vote in favor of Ukraine’s membership. There is no chance of this happening while there is gunfire in [Ukraine]. The key problem is the conflict, which will prompt many NATO members to say: if we accept Ukraine, we inherit these problems with Russia.” Unfortunately, Washington’s determination to see both Georgia and Ukraine admitted to NATO has not diminished over the years. Even the persistence of severe tensions between Russia and Ukraine since the 2014 crisis has had little sobering effect on U.S. officials or NATO enlargement advocates within the American foreign policy community. Indeed, when Russia annexed Crimea following the success of U.S.-encouraged demonstrators in ousting the elected, pro-Russian Ukrainian government of Viktor Yanukovych, anti-Russian American hawks seem more determined than ever to extend Washington’s security umbrella over Ukraine and Georgia. Writing in the May 5, 2014 issue of the Weekly Standard, John Bolton made that objective clear: Obama left Ukraine and Georgia to fend for themselves, ignoring the politico-military reality that Russia instinctively understood. He thereby left open the vulnerability that Bush had tried to close in April 2008. Many who now oppose robust U.S. efforts to protect Ukraine from Russian depredation and partition assert that we have no serious interests there, and accordingly also reject any hint we might once again consider NATO membership. Yet, in the long term, joining the alliance is the only strategy that can realistically secure Georgian and Ukrainian sovereignty and keep alive the option of joining the West more broadly. That view is worrisome, given Bolton’s position as President Trump’s National Security Adviser. Other vocal conservatives are joining the campaign to secure NATO membership for Georgia and Ukraine. Luke Coffey, Director of the Douglas and Sarah Allison Center for Foreign Policy at the conservative Heritage Foundation, issued a report in January 2018 titled “NATO Membership for Georgia: In U.S. and European Interest” Coffey stated flatly that the United States must “continue to be an advocate” for Georgia’s membership in NATO. The report also urged NATO members at the upcoming July summit in Brussels to reaffirm the commitment originally made in 2008 concerning eventual membership for Georgia. Continuing enthusiasm for adding Georgia and Ukraine to NATO is not confined to conservative or neoconservative precincts. Atlantic Council scholars Damon Wilson and David J. Kramer authored an August 2018 report, “Enlarge NATO to Ensure Peace in Europe.” In it, they argued that “Extending NATO membership to nations who earn it can eliminate destabilizing security vacuums.” In their view, not taking such a step creates needless dangers: “Without a sense of timing on when such membership is coming, the dangerous gray zone that Ukraine and Georgia find themselves in will continue. Allies should not allow their aspirations to be held hostage by Russian occupation.” Unfortunately, the Trump administration appears to be thinking along the same reckless lines. On a visit to Tbilisi in August 2017, Vice President Mike Pence blithely declared: “President Trump and I stand by the 2008 NATO Bucharest statement, which made it clear that Georgia will one day become a member of NATO.” He added: “We strongly support Georgia’s aspiration to become a member of NATO. And we’ll continue to work closely with this Prime Minister and the government of Georgia broadly to advance the policies that will facilitate becoming a NATO member.” Indeed, the administration is forging close military ties with Kiev even without Ukraine becoming a formal member of NATO. Washington has sent U.S. troops as participants in joint military exercises with Ukrainian forces—an act that Moscow considers especially provocative, given its continuing tense relations with Kiev. Secretary of Defense James Mattis admits that U.S. instructors have been training Ukrainian military units at a base in western Ukraine. Washington also has approved two important arms sales to Kiev in just the past ten months. The policy of restraint that Germany, France and other Western European nations have adopted regarding membership for those two countries is considerably more sensible than Washington’s stance. It is uncertain how firm that resistance will remain, however, in the face of a concerted campaign by influential elements of the American foreign policy community and the Trump administration itself. One hopes that the determination on the part of Washington’s key European allies to shield the United States from its own foreign policy folly persists. Expanding NATO to include Georgia and Ukraine would intrude into Russia’s core security zone. Moscow would not likely let such a menace to its national security go unchallenged, and the results could be tragic for everyone concerned.
The lack of realism such positions exhibit is breathtaking. If the hardliners had prevailed, no summit would have taken place. Their demands were multiple poison pills to any feasible negotiations. And the consequences flowing from the course they favored would have been the perpetuation, if not escalation, of alarming tensions on the Korean Peninsula. By spurning their advice, Trump secured a worthwhile change in the dynamics of the U.S.-North Korean relationship. The rapprochement may yet falter, since there are still extremely serious disagreements between the two countries, but the summit was a beneficial reset that has reduced the danger of a catastrophic military confrontation. Because he focused on the achievable, Trump secured a modest, but constructive, gain both for the United States and the East Asian region. The president has an opportunity for an even more important success in his upcoming summit with Putin. But even more than he did with North Korea, he needs to make major changes in current U.S. policy toward Russia and reject the advice and demands that Russophobic hardliners are pushing. Once again, the president must distinguish between achievable and unachievable goals. And he must be willing to make meaningful concessions to the Russian leader to secure the former. Some of Washington’s existing demands are manifestly unrealistic. Russia is not going to reverse its annexation of Crimea and return that territory to Ukraine. The Kremlin’s move was at least partly a response to the clumsy and provocative actionsthat the United States and key European Union powers took to support demonstrators who unseated Ukraine’s elected, pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, before the expiration of his term. Moscow was not about to accept that Western power play and watch the region containing Russia’s main naval base come under the control of a manifestly hostile Ukrainian regime. Given the stakes involved, Russia is no more likely to withdraw from Crimea than Israel is likely to return the Golan Heights to Syria or Turkey return occupied northern Cyprus to the Republic of Cyprus. Persisting in an utterly unattainable demand regarding Crimea before U.S. and EU sanctions against Russia will be lifted is pointless. Inducing the Kremlin to reduce and phase out its support for separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine is more achievable. Indeed, despite the hysterical allegations that appear periodically in the Western press, Russia’s backing of the insurgents has been quite limited and is far less than constituting an “invasion.” Putin shows little stomach for making Ukraine an arena for a full-fledged confrontation with the West. A similar situation exists with respect to Syria. The Kremlin clearly wishes to see Bashar al-Assad remain in power, and given the extreme Islamist orientation of many of Assad’s opponents, that is not an outrageous position. Nevertheless, Putin has avoided establishing a large-scale Russian military, especially ground force, presence in that country. He apparently wishes to confine Moscow’s role to protecting its naval base at Tartus and assisting Assad’s military efforts with Russian air power. There appears to be an opportunity for Washington to gain assurances from the Kremlin that its involvement in Syria will not escalate and might even recede gradually. To secure such goals, though, the U.S. would need to offer some appealing concessions to Putin. In exchange for ending Russian support of Ukrainian secessionists and confirming Moscow’s toleration of the anti-Russian regime in Kiev, Trump should be willing to sign an agreement pledging that the United States will neither propose not endorse NATO membership for Ukraine or Georgia. NATO’s previous waves of enlargement right up to Russia’s border were a key factor in the deterioration of the West’s relations with Moscow. It is time to end that provocation. In addition to that concession, Trump should pledge that NATO military exercises (war games) in Eastern Europe and the Black Sea will come to an end. In exchange, the United States ought to insist that Russian forces end their provocative deployments in Kaliningrad and along Russia’s frontier with NATO members.
The United States-Russia relationship is already in bad shape, and U.S. diplomats are hurting it further by sending conflicting messages about Ukraine’s future relationship with NATO. First, NATO and Kiev signed a letter of intent in February for cooperation between their special operations forces. Two months later American ambassador and current NATO Deputy Secretary-General Alexander Vershbow said it was time to bring the Ukrainian military “in line with NATO standards.” Barely one week later, though, the U.S. Ambassador to NATO ruled out NATO expansion for the “next several years.” These muddled messages only cause confusion, provoking Russia while potentially false hope for Ukraine. For that reason, it’s time for Washington to make clear that Ukrainian accession to NATO is not on the table. Here’s why. First, NATO possesses almost no ability to defend Ukraine. Russia has 270,000 troops and 700 jet fighters positioned on Ukraine’s southern and western borders. And as Russia demonstrated in 2015 when it sent 150,000 troops to surround Ukraine, Moscow can quickly mobilize its military in the event of a conflict. Crimea, meanwhile, became a Russian fortress after its annexation. Moscow has fortified the peninsula with 25,000 troops, numerous ships and subs, as well as its lethal S400 air-to-ground missiles — a weapon which could shoot down multiple NATO jets up to 250 miles away. Moreover, as Russia’s recent Syrian campaign demonstrated, its military now possesses the same type of advanced precision targeting cruise missiles used by the United States, providing yet another weapon Moscow could deploy against NATO if a war around Ukraine and the Black Sea broke out. Finally — and perhaps most troublingly — Russia even claims the right to deploy nuclear weapons to Crimea. Given the massive military force Moscow can bring to bear around Ukraine, any American strategist advocating inviting Kiev into NATO should answer some difficult military questions: Recent war games revealed NATO would lose a war in the Baltics to Russia within 36 to 60 hours, and it’s hard to envision anything other than a similar outcome in Ukraine. In addition, Washington confronts not only significant military obstacles in defending Ukraine, but also faces a significant gap between the Russian and American stakes in the country. As Putin’s invasion of Crimea and subsequent escalation in eastern Ukraine showed, Kiev’s geopolitical orientation is a supremely important national interest for Russia. By contrast, U.S. President Barack Obama’s unwillingness to supply Ukraine with lethal arms, much less deploy combat troops to Ukraine, indicates Washington’s interests are peripheral at best. To understand why this is the case, those who want Ukraine to join NATO should go back and read Russian President Vladimir Putin’s March 18, 2014 speech announcing the annexation of Crimea. Arguing that Russia was forced to annex Crimea to forestall the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO, Putin asserted that the West “had lied to us many times. This happened with NATO’s expansion to the East.… NATO remains a military alliance. I do not want to be welcomed in Sevastopol by NATO sailors.” Putin’s words are not mere rhetoric. The West long underestimated the deep humiliation felt by Moscow as a result of NATO expansion toward Russia’s borders in the decades after the fall of the former Soviet Union, and even the United States Navy’s top commander in Europe admits Russia views NATO as an “existential threat” today. To make a historical analogy, Russia views NATO membership for Ukraine similarly to how U.S. President John F. Kennedy viewed the deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba in 1962. Given that NATO was — and remains — a military alliance directed against Russia, dismissing Moscow’s feelings on this subject as merely “paranoia” is too simplistic. Proponents of Ukraine’s NATO membership argue Russia must not receive a veto over Ukraine’s geopolitical orientation. Morally this is correct — especially considering the fact that Putin’s annexation of Crimea was a clear violation of international law. Moreover, Ukraine’s decision to officially identify Russia as an enemy is the right one, and it’s easy to see why Kiev would want American assistance in its ongoing struggle with Moscow. The United States, though, also receives a vote on NATO expansion, and no matter how much the United States may admire post-Maidan Ukraine’s willingness to change its trajectory, before entering into any military alliance Washington policymakers should always ask themselves the following question: Will this commitment increase or decrease the United States’ national security? Absent Washington’s willingness to play a game of nuclear chicken with Moscow, Ukraine’s accession to NATO weakens American national security rather than enhancing it. To be clear, none of this means the United States should provide Russia a complete veto over Ukraine’s future, and Ukraine must remain free to develop any economic relationship with the West it wishes. Kiev already signed an Association Agreement with the European Union, signifying a long-term commitment to Ukraine’s economic integration with Europe, and Washington should push the Europeans to place full EU membership for Kiev on a fast track. Furthermore, the West should continue its ongoing non-military support for Ukraine. Politically, Western sanctions on Moscow should remain in place until Russia honors the Minsk II agreement by withdrawing its troops from the Donbass region and ending military support for the separatists. While Crimea almost certainly remains lost to Ukraine, the West must not recognize the peninsula is part of Russia absent a mutually satisfactory solution on Crimea directly between Moscow and Kiev. The United States employed the same policy during the Cold War towards the Soviet Union’s annexation of the Baltic states, meaning precedent for this approach exists. The West should also continue to support Ukraine financially, especially its brave civil activists determined to break the grip of Kiev’s predatory officials. In addition, while   President Barack Obama rightly resists sending billions of dollars of lethal arms to Ukraine, Washington should continue shipping non-lethal aid. Finally, the United States and its European allies should significantly increase humanitarian aid to Ukraine as Kiev struggles to feed and care for the millions of internal refugees victimized by the war in the Donbass. Located astride a giant neighbor, Ukraine is a classic victim of Robert Kaplan’s “revenge of geography.”Trying to solve this problem for Kiev by inviting it to join NATO is not in American national interests. But while the United States should rule out NATO membership for Kiev, it need not abandon Ukraine to its fate.
F. Stephen Larrabee, an expert on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Eastern Europe, says Russia’s invasion of Georgia was meant to demonstrate Moscow’s sensitivity to NATO’s moves into what were formerly parts of the Soviet Union. He says the actions in Georgia were in effect a "sideshow" to Ukraine, which also has been seeking NATO membership and is strategically more important to Moscow. "It’s an effort by the Russians to try to halt the expansion of Western influence into the former Soviet space, particularly the expansion of NATO," he says. Larrabee urged a clear response from the West to penalize Russia but added: "It’s very important that this spiral of action and reaction not be allowed to get out of hand." You’ve been a student of East-West relations for some time. Where do you think these relations are going in the aftermath of the Russia-Georgia conflict, which is still not completely over? The first thing that needs to be said is there is obviously going to be some consequences and fallout in relations with Russia. And it’s quite clear that some things will be put on hold, such as the suspension of some of the meetings with Russia within NATO. But the larger danger here is that there will be an action-reaction spiral, with one side taking an action and the other side reacting strongly to it. And you’ve seen this already beginning with the Russian reaction to the signing with Poland of the agreement on the deployment of a missile defense system in Poland. This reminds me in a way of certain events during the Cold War, where the Soviets did some things in their own zone of occupation in Germany, and we responded by fusing the British and American zones, and they responded to that. And within a period of two or three years, you had the making of a real confrontation. I’m not suggesting that we are going back to Cold War, but this spiral of action and reaction could easily lead to a more confrontational policy over the next year or so. What would be your advice to the next administration on how to deal with all of this? As far as Georgia itself is concerned, we have to make clear to the Russians that they have to withdraw from Georgian territory and that there are costs and consequences for violating the sovereignty of Georgia. On the other hand, as I said, it’s very important that this spiral of action and reaction not be allowed to get out of hand. One should recognize that the Russians have been stepping up pressure on Georgia for some time, especially since the Europeans and the United States recognized the independence of Kosovo from Russian-backed Serbia. The Russians indicated that the independence of Kosovo would have consequences for entities like South Ossetia and Abkhazia, which had declared their independence from Georgia. This was a crisis that has been brewing for many months and had its origins more broadly in the downturn in relations with Russia after the end of the Cold War. The Russians feel that the West has exploited their weakness. And now that they are stronger, and particularly in the oil and energy front, they want to renegotiate the terms of their relations with the West. President Vladimir Putin’s speech in Munich in February 2007 was an important signal of the hardening of the Russian line. He essentially said: "Enough is enough. We are going to defend our own interests." In this sense, what you see in Georgia is the Russians drawing a line in the sand saying that they have strategic interests and they are going to defend them. The Russians were concerned about the erosion of their influence in the former Soviet space. The Russian invasion was a reaction to the destabilizing impulses unleashed by the Orange Revolution [in Ukraine] and the Rose Revolution [in Georgia]. It’s an effort by the Russians to try to halt the expansion of Western influence into the former Soviet space, particularly the expansion of NATO. It’s not the beginning of a new effort to try to expand Russian influence into the West, but rather an attempt to maintain their influence in the former Soviet space, which they felt was eroding. In the aftermath of all of this, the people who argued against the expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe in the Clinton administration are now coming forward again and saying they were right. What was your position at that time? I believed that the first two expansions of NATO to incorporate states like Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Romania, as well as the Baltic States, were correct. But it’s quite a different situation when NATO’s talking about moving into the former Soviet space. We have to be very careful not to make defense commitments to countries that we are not willing or able to carry out. If Poland, or let’s say Hungary, were threatened, we would have a consensus in NATO to take action to defend them. In the case of Georgia and Ukraine, some of the NATO allies are not quite sure that these are "European" countries, and they are not ready to take on new defense commitments to these countries. The United States has to be very careful about making commitments to countries unless it’s absolutely sure that the commitments can be carried out. You’ve been an advisor on some projects with the Georgian government. Can you provide any insight on why President Mikheil Saakashvili decided to send his troops into South Ossetia when he had to know that the Russia would answer with force? You have to look at this and see both his personality and his history. He didn’t get to where he is today by sitting around and waiting. He became president because he made a daring move, which everyone told him not to make, to unseat President Eduard Shevardnadze. Then in early 2004 he successsfully retook the rebel province of Adjara, in a bold and daring move that caught the Russians by surprise. The basic history has been one where he has succeeded by acting unconventionally. He is a very self-confident individual. He thought that if he took decisive and quick action to retake South Ossetia, the Russians would be forced to accept the outcome, as they had been in Adjara. But he underestimated the Russian response. In the months prior to the invasion the Russians had been moving their troops up to the South Ossetian border. They had conducted maneuvers in July which were essentially a dress rehearsal for the invasion. The Russians essentially sucker punched Saakashvili and he walked into the trap. This time they were prepared and when he launched his attack to retake South Ossetia, they moved decisively with overwhelming force. And he now has to pay the consequences. He gambled recklessly against U.S. advice and this time he lost in a very big way. Sen. John McCain (R-AZ) has been urging, as he has for some time, that Russia be asked to leave the G8 [Group of Eight leading industrial states]. There has been talk of barring Russia from joining the World Trade Organization and there is talk about the collapse of the U.S.-Russia civil nuclear agreement. Where do we stand on various arms control agreements with Russia? The START Agreement [Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty] has to be renegotiated since it expires in December 2009. Obviously this will probably not begin soon, but it’s not as if we’re penalizing the Russians by not going forward. The larger point is that we have to be very careful in deciding what types of things we want to suspend and what types of things we don’t want to. The idea of expelling Russia from the G8 is a nonstarter. We wouldn’t get support from our European allies, and I don’t think that it would have much of an impact on Russia. The blocking of Russian entry into the World Trade Organization [WTO] would be quite different. This is something that the Russians really want and need. Therefore we have some leverage. We should demand that the Russians withdraw their troops from Georgia and we should not support their entering the WTO until they comply. On the arms control negotiations, it doesn’t seem to me that there is much point in starting them right now when relations with Russia are so tense. We shouldn’t say that we will never go forward, but we should not do so right now. We shouldn’t cut off or suspend things that are in our own interest. It’s unclear to me if the Russians themselves realized how much they were going to strain their relations with the European Union or the United States because of the move into Georgia. They underestimated the impact on the West, but I don’t think that would have stopped them. The invasion was something that they felt had to be done to protect their interests in the Caucasus and the former Soviet space more broadly. There were a number of motivations for the invasion. One, of course, was to punish the Georgian president and to teach him a lesson. Beyond that, the Russians were intent on sending a broader message to the West: to say, in effect, "We are ready to protect our interest in the former Soviet space and use force if necessary." They also wanted to send a message to the countries of the former Soviet space that in a crisis they can’t depend on NATO or the United States. The Russians may have underestimated the economic costs of their action, but when push came to shove, they decided that this was something that they had to do and that they weren’t going to be pushed around anymore. I guess they were particularly upset at the last NATO summit, which declared that Georgia and Ukraine should eventually become members of NATO. Oh, absolutely. The issue here is not simply Georgia. Georgia is a sideshow. What the Russians are really concerned about is Ukraine. Georgia’s entry into NATO wouldn’t have major strategic consequences for Russia. Ukraine on the other hand, is a very different matter. That would have much greater strategic consequences and destroy any possibility of trying to develop a Slavic Union composed of Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine. It would also have an effect on the Russian defense industry because they don’t want to break those ties between the defense industries of Russia and Ukraine. So the strategic consequences of Ukraine joining NATO far exceed those of Georgia. In short, this is much more about Ukraine. The real question for the United States in the aftermath of what happened in Georgia is whether this is the right time to accelerate efforts to bring Ukraine into NATO? I would think this would be a time when we want to be cautious and careful. The White House announced today that Vice President Cheney will go to Azerbaijan, Georgia, Ukraine, and Italy early next month. The purpose of the trip is to consult on matters of mutual interest. Is this wise? In this case it’s very important that we send a high-level official to show support for these countries, but showing support by sending the vice president for discussions is one thing. Accelerating NATO membership with all its implications is quite another.
To break out of this impasse, the United States will have to—for its part—make several key adjustments to its Russia policy, including: prioritize U.S. interests vis-à-vis Russia and focus on the essentials—the nuclear relationship and strategic stability; leave Russia’s internal affairs for Russians to untangle; halt NATO’s eastward expansion and refocus on the alliance’s core mission of collective defense; be clear with Ukraine and Georgia that they should not base their foreign policies on the assumption that they will join NATO, but sustain robust programs of security cooperation with them; and rethink the sanctions policy toward Russia and use them with restraint. These changes will not, by themselves, guarantee a different U.S. relationship with Russia, since the Kremlin would also have to make major changes in Russia’s foreign policy behavior. But pursuing the same policy and expecting different results is not a sound approach for the United States. At the very least, the proposed changes would restore a measure of realism, prudence, and discipline to U.S. policy; more closely align the ends and means of U.S. policy toward Russia; avoid inflicting further harm to the relationship; hold the door open for cooperation on shared interests; and shed the chronic habit of overpromising and underdelivering. These are not grandiose or transformational objectives, but they are realistic and attainable and will help the two countries manage their differences more effectively. To quote the great philosopher and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, sometimes it is best to find “proximate solutions to insoluble problems.”
Ukraine has faced ferocious political turmoil and civilian unrest in recent years, marked by war and corruption. Currently, it is crucial for Ukraine to continue its path to democracy. Congress must recognize how the U.S. benefits from humanitarian aid to Ukraine now more than ever. In the wake of recent cuts to foreign assistance in the 2018 and 2019 budget proposal, Ukraine’s stability depends on its American partnership. For more than two-thirds of the twentieth century, Ukraine endured the oppressiveness of the Soviet Union. In 1991, Ukraine gained its independence, but it was plagued by deep-seated political corruption. This stronghold-tainted governance in Ukraine resulted in the imprisonment of its first female prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko in 2011 and the exiling of its fourth president Viktor Yanukovich in 2014. Not only has Ukraine suffered instability and corruption in its political arena, but dirty politics have bled through its microeconomics as well. For example, patients may have access to medical treatment, but they oftentimes must bribe doctors in order to get the treatment they really need. This deep-rooted corruption which permeates all levels of society and government in Ukraine has historically threatened foreign aid and investment. Unfortunately, foreign interest is tightening its grip on the power of the purse. In a recent breakthrough, Ukraine’s largest foreign backers, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the European Union (E.U.), announced they will not lend to Ukraine without serious progress on key reforms, including the fight against corruption. The IMF is comprised of 189 countries working to promote sustainable economic growth, trade and global poverty reduction. The upside is that corruption levels have actually begun to decrease. In recent years, Ukraine has taken long-term steps to fight against corruption, including implementing anti-corruption agencies in the judiciary, public procurement and state-owned enterprises. These are some incentives that Congress can rely on when weighing in on how the U.S. benefits from foreign aid to Ukraine. The U.S. has been the world’s only superpower since the fall of the Soviet Union. America as a superpower holds great influence, characterized by its far-reaching ability to exert influence on a global scale. So what are the U.S. benefits from foreign aid to Ukraine? The U.S. has much to gain from coordinating with donors to Ukraine. Undeniably, foreign aid has been historically used in policymaking as a means to gain international leverage. Assisting Ukraine with humanitarian and foreign aid helps promote U.S. policy objectives. Ukraine is situated between Russia and the NATO-affiliated European countries, a geostrategic location for both the U.S. and the E.U. Foreign aid to Ukraine will also support nuclear security, a strong interest to global safety, despite much of Ukraine’s energy resources now coming from Europe. Establishing Ukraine’s own energy supplies will prevent Russia from making weapons of Ukraine’s energy resources in the future. Additionally, remedying Ukraine’s medical industry under the Global Health Initiative (GHI) will significantly improve disease containment. GHI aims to improve public health and strengthen U.S. national security through detecting, preventing and controlling global disease. Agencies such as PEPFAR provide direct service and assistance in Ukraine to maximize the medical quality and coverage of the national HIV/AIDS response. Lastly, the U.S. benefits from foreign aid to Ukraine by assisting Ukrainians who suffer from the War in Donbass. In March of 2014, Russia responded to Ukraine’s distressed political state by invading and annexing Crimea, an Eastern Ukrainian territory, which has caused war and hurt Ukraine’s economic growth. This has created political, economic and social conflict, and is a direct result of the War in Donbas, home to Ukraine’s major mining industry. The Trump Administration recently approved a sale of lethal weapons to Ukraine. Political analysts believe that the public will see the sales as a principled signal that the United States will support its allies. This type of political leverage is a clear way the U.S. can benefit from its support to Ukraine. The move was made in light of ongoing requests by Ukrainian advocates as a result of the War in Donbass and supported by the fact that Ukraine was not the aggressor. The U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aid in Ukraine (OCHA) has calculated that nearly 4.4 million Ukrainians are affected by the conflict in Donbas and 3.4 million are in need of humanitarian aid and protection. Now, more than ever, Ukraine needs humanitarian aid. Because funding for humanitarian aid has been cut in 2018 and is projected to be cut again in 2019, the World Food Bank can only assist those affected by the War in Donbass. Yet, the rest of Ukraine suffers, as 23 percent of households will go without adequate food. Despite this, people in Eastern Ukraine are suffering the most from displacement, lack of medical care and food and subjectivity to war. As the world’s only superpower since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which left Ukraine in disarray, the U.S. benefits from foreign aid to Ukraine because it will help build confidence in the people suffering in Ukraine and promote the democracy Ukraine has struggled to achieve. When democracy is encouraged in the world, it is always an interest of the U.S.
Since Ukraine regained its independence in 1991, it has been a good partner for the United States on issues that mattered critically for U.S. foreign and security policy. For example, in the early 1990s, Ukraine gave up the nuclear arsenal that it inherited following the collapse of the Soviet Union. That included 176 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and 44 Blackjack and Bear-H strategic bombers, along with the 1,900 strategic nuclear warheads those missiles and bombers could carry—all of which were designed and built to strike the United States. In the late 1990s, Kyiv agreed to align its non-proliferation policy with Washington’s. One immediate result: The Ukrainian government terminated a contract that the Ukrainian company Turboatom had to supply the turbine generator for the nuclear power plant that the Russians were building at Bushehr, Iran. Years later, the Ukrainian government agreed to transfer all its highly enriched uranium to consolidated, secure storage, a key goal of U.S. nuclear security policy. In 2003, following the fall of Baghdad, Ukraine agreed to provide three battalions to the Iraq coalition stabilization force. From that summer until the end of 2005, Ukraine had the fourth largest troop contingent in Iraq, after the United States, Britain, and Poland. Ukraine has not moved as fast on domestic political and economic reforms as Washington would have liked—but on key foreign policy issues, Kyiv has been very responsive to U.S. desires. That merits American interest.
John Yoo, author of the notorious “torture memo,” served on the Cato editorial board for Cato Supreme Court Review during the Bush presidency. At the same time, Yoo was writing the Bush administration’s legal justifications for waterboarding, Guantánamo, warrantless wiretapping and more. Yoo also contributed articles to Cato Supreme Court Review and a chapter to a Cato book titled The Rule of Law in the Wake of Clinton criticizing President Clinton’s “imperial presidency.” The “Cato Policy Report” attacked progressive critics of Bush’s “War on Terror” as “Terrorism’s Fellow Travelers“ in its November/December 2001 issue. Former Vice President of Research Brink Lindsey wrote, “Most of the America haters flushed out by September 11 are huddled on the left wing of the conventional political spectrum.” Another Cato executive, Ted Galen Carpenter, former VP for defense and foreign policy studies, enthusiastically supported Bush’s “war on terror” and called on Bush to invade Pakistan. The Cato Institute advised the 2002–04 Republican-dominated Congress to commence military strikes in Pakistan in its Cato Handbook for Congress arguing, “Ultimately, Afghanistan becomes less important as a place to conduct military operations in the war on terrorism and more important as a place from which to launch military operations. And those operations should be directed across the border into neighboring Pakistan.” Another Cato Institute executive, Roger Pilon, vigorously supported Bush’s attacks on civil liberties. Pilon, Cato’s VP for legal affairs and founding director of the Cato Institute’s “Center for Constitutional Studies,” supported expanded FBI wiretapping in 2002 and called on Congress to reauthorize the Patriot Act as late as 2008. While it’s true that compared to other pro-Republican think-tanks, Cato did have periods when it was critical of Bush’s wars and attacks on civil liberties, those attacks weren’t consistent and showed every sign of being subordinated to the Cato Institute’s political demands. The most obvious example of this came in 2005, when Cato suddenly called a halt to its growing criticisms of Bush’s “war on terror” and fired one of its most ardent anti-interventionists (another resigned), sparking a backlash from some prominent non-Cato libertarians like antiwar.com’s Justin Raimondo, who wrote: “Now that the majority of Americans have turned against this war, the Cato bigwigs are lining up with the neoconservatives who want to ‘stay the course.’” In 2006, with Bush’s presidency in tatters, Cato restarted its criticism in earnest.
Cato Claim #2: The Cato Institute is independent of the Republican Party establishment and often as much in opposition to the GOP as to the Democrats. Fact: In reality, the Cato Institute has been one of the leading Republican Party policy and propaganda factories since at least the early 1990s. In 1995, the LA Times described the Cato Institute as the Republican revolution’s favorite hangout, “the hottest think tank in town. On any given day, House Majority Whip Tom DeLay of Texas might be visiting for lunch. Or Cato staffers might be plotting strategy with House Majority Leader Dick Armey, another Texan, and his staff. Cato’s constitutional law briefs cross the desks of conservative Supreme Court justices and their clerks.” In 2005, a Washington Post article observed, “Nowadays, Cato alumni are everywhere in the Bush administration.” Among Cato figures in the Bush administration named in the article: Andrew Biggs, Derrick Max, Charles Blahous, Leanne Abdnor and Carolyn Weaver, who helped launch Cato’s war on Social Security back in 1979. President Bush’s high-priority Social Security privatization plan was all thanks to lobbying by Cato president Ed Crane and Cato executive José Piñera, a former Pinochet official who heads Cato’s Social Security privatization project. Cato Claim #3: The Kochs are staging an unprecedented GOP takeover of the Cato Institute by staffing it with Republican Party operatives and backers (here and here). Fact: The Cato Institute’s board of directors and staff have always been stacked with Republican Party supporters, donors and operatives. Rupert Murdoch was a Cato board member, serving at least through the early 2000s. When Murdoch first joined Cato’s board, Ed Crane hailed the News Corp chief as “a strong advocate of the free market and a committed civil libertarian.” So was Murdoch’s longtime US partner, John C. Malone of Liberty Media, whom Al Gore once reportedly called the Darth Vader of cable. Malone is a major GOP donor and the largest private landowner in the United States. Stephen Moore, longtime Dick Armey sidekick and author of the 2004 hagiography Bullish on Bush: How George W. Bush’s Ownership Society Will Make America Stronger, was director of Cato’s Fiscal Policy Studies and remains a senior fellow. Other major GOP sponsors on the Cato board before the Kochs’ recent “coup” include K. Tucker Andersen, Howard Rich (funder of the term-limits movement) and Ethelmae C. Humphreys, who along with her son has “doled out hundreds of thousands of dollars to Republican candidates.” Republican operatives in Cato are numerous and include former Phil Gramm staffer and Bush HUD deputy assistant secretary Mark Calabria, director of Cato’s Financial Regulation Studies; and former Senate Republican Policy Committee analyst Michael Cannon, director of Cato’s health policy studies and adviser to Florida Republican Governor Rick Scott. Cannon’s “independent scholarship” includes his famous November 2008 Cato blog post: Blocking Obama’s Health Plan Is Key to the GOP’s Survival. That’s before Obama took office. Cato Claim #4: Cato’s employees are “independent” scholars free from the corrupting influence of “special interests.” Fact: The Cato Institute is one of the leading manufacturers of toxic corporate propaganda, cynically undermining science and scholarship to serve the interests of tobacco companies, oil and gas, chemicals, health insurance, financial industry and other Cato donors. Cato chairman Robert Levy, who today accuses the Kochs of turning Cato into “a mouthpiece of special interests,” once faithfully served the tobacco industry as a leading tobacco-death denialist. In his article, “Lies, Damn Lies & 400,000 Smoking-Related Deaths”, Levy claimed, “children do not die of tobacco-related diseases” and “there is no credible evidence that 400,000 deaths per year—or any number remotely close to 400,000—are caused by tobacco.” (In fact, tobacco use kills more than 5 million people a year worldwide.) Greenpeace labeled Cato a “Koch Industries climate denial front group” that is “focused on disputing the science behind global warming and questioning the rationale for taking action.” Among Cato’s anti-science propagandists: Patrick J. Michaels, called “a serial deleter of inconvenient facts” by ThinkProgress and Steven Milloy, a onetime Cato adjunct scholar on the payroll of Philip Morris, oil companies and others. Philip Morris listed Cato VP David Boaz as one of its “National Allies;&rdquo in a 2000 memo. In 2001, a British-American Tobacco executive sent a thank-you letter to Levy and the Cato Institute, noting: “I was also pleased to learn after our meeting that our subsidiary company, Brown & Williamson, provided the Cato Institute with funding in 2000.” So there you have it: a brief look at the Cato Institute’s factual record, which reads nothing at all like the heroic fairytales spun by Cato and its allies about its principled opposition to the Bush Administration’s imperial presidency, or its opposition to the Republican Party, or whatever else Cato’s minions tell us to win our hearts rather than our minds. In fact, it’s hard to know what, if anything, to believe about Cato—PR and spin are so ingrained in their thinking and their breathing, one wonders if Cato’s own flaks can tell the difference themselves between reality and spin.
Fact: In reality, the Cato Institute has been one of the leading Republican Party policy and propaganda factories since at least the early 1990s. In 1995, the LA Times described the Cato Institute as the Republican revolution’s favorite hangout, “the hottest think tank in town. On any given day, House Majority Whip Tom DeLay of Texas might be visiting for lunch. Or Cato staffers might be plotting strategy with House Majority Leader Dick Armey, another Texan, and his staff. Cato’s constitutional law briefs cross the desks of conservative Supreme Court justices and their clerks.” In 2005, a Washington Post article observed, “Nowadays, Cato alumni are everywhere in the Bush administration.” Among Cato figures in the Bush administration named in the article: Andrew Biggs, Derrick Max, Charles Blahous, Leanne Abdnor and Carolyn Weaver, who helped launch Cato’s war on Social Security back in 1979. President Bush’s high-priority Social Security privatization plan was all thanks to lobbying by Cato president Ed Crane and Cato executive José Piñera, a former Pinochet official who heads Cato’s Social Security privatization project.
Fact: The Cato Institute’s board of directors and staff have always been stacked with Republican Party supporters, donors and operatives. Rupert Murdoch was a Cato board member, serving at least through the early 2000s. When Murdoch first joined Cato’s board, Ed Crane hailed the News Corp chief as “a strong advocate of the free market and a committed civil libertarian.” So was Murdoch’s longtime US partner, John C. Malone of Liberty Media, whom Al Gore once reportedly called the Darth Vader of cable. Malone is a major GOP donor and the largest private landowner in the United States. Stephen Moore, longtime Dick Armey sidekick and author of the 2004 hagiography Bullish on Bush: How George W. Bush’s Ownership Society Will Make America Stronger, was director of Cato’s Fiscal Policy Studies and remains a senior fellow. Other major GOP sponsors on the Cato board before the Kochs’ recent “coup” include K. Tucker Andersen, Howard Rich (funder of the term-limits movement) and Ethelmae C. Humphreys, who along with her son has “doled out hundreds of thousands of dollars to Republican candidates.” Republican operatives in Cato are numerous and include former Phil Gramm staffer and Bush HUD deputy assistant secretary Mark Calabria, director of Cato’s Financial Regulation Studies; and former Senate Republican Policy Committee analyst Michael Cannon, director of Cato’s health policy studies and adviser to Florida Republican Governor Rick Scott. Cannon’s “independent scholarship” includes his famous November 2008 Cato blog post: Blocking Obama’s Health Plan Is Key to the GOP’s Survival. That’s before Obama took office.
Fact: The Cato Institute is one of the leading manufacturers of toxic corporate propaganda, cynically undermining science and scholarship to serve the interests of tobacco companies, oil and gas, chemicals, health insurance, financial industry and other Cato donors. Cato chairman Robert Levy, who today accuses the Kochs of turning Cato into “a mouthpiece of special interests,” once faithfully served the tobacco industry as a leading tobacco-death denialist. In his article, “Lies, Damn Lies & 400,000 Smoking-Related Deaths”, Levy claimed, “children do not die of tobacco-related diseases” and “there is no credible evidence that 400,000 deaths per year—or any number remotely close to 400,000—are caused by tobacco.” (In fact, tobacco use kills more than 5 million people a year worldwide.) Greenpeace labeled Cato a “Koch Industries climate denial front group” that is “focused on disputing the science behind global warming and questioning the rationale for taking action.” Among Cato’s anti-science propagandists: Patrick J. Michaels, called “a serial deleter of inconvenient facts” by ThinkProgress and Steven Milloy, a onetime Cato adjunct scholar on the payroll of Philip Morris, oil companies and others. Philip Morris listed Cato VP David Boaz as one of its “National Allies;&rdquo in a 2000 memo. In 2001, a British-American Tobacco executive sent a thank-you letter to Levy and the Cato Institute, noting: “I was also pleased to learn after our meeting that our subsidiary company, Brown & Williamson, provided the Cato Institute with funding in 2000.”
Scandal plagued consultant, Jack Abramoff has joined the ranks of propagandists with allegations of his paying a Copley News columnist to write stories favorable to his clients. Doug Bandow has been suspended from his position at Copley and has resigned his fellowship at the Cato Institute. Bandow admitted taking payments from Abramoff saying, “It was a lapse of judgment on my part, and I take full responsibility for it.” For a journalist to describe trading money for ink as a lapse of judgement may indicate a lapse of sanity. And his acceptance of responsibility provides absolutely nothing in compensation for the lies published in his name.
Trump administration officials and their hawkish domestic allies sound increasingly strident alarm bells about foreign meddling in Venezuela’s internal political turmoil. They contend that Russia, China, Cuba, and Hezbollah are especially active in supporting leftist president Nicolas Maduro’s beleaguered government. Indeed, some U.S. analysts insist that without outside backing, especially by Russia and Cuba, pro-democracy opposition forces likely would have forced him to relinquish power already. When anti-government demonstrations erupted in Caracas on April 30, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo stated that Maduro had been ready to board a plane to fly to exile in Havana but changed his mind at Russia’s urging. U.S. leaders appear to exaggerate the extent of Moscow’s meddling. Given Maduro’s uncompromising behavior throughout the most recent demonstrations, the notion that he was ready to flee the country absent Russian intervention seems far-fetched. The loyalty of Venezuela’s military has not yet wavered, and he continues to draw support from left-wing citizens’ militias. Those factors have been more relevant to his continued grip on power than Russian (or any other foreign) support. Nevertheless, Russia definitely has meddled in Venezuela’s political turbulence. Moscow is a major financial prop for Maduro’s government, and the Kremlin has provided tangible military backing as well. In December 2018, Russia deployed two nuclear-capable bombers to Venezuela, and in March 2019, it sent some 200 military personnel to help Caracas refurbish its air defense system. Several hundred Russian mercenaries also appear to be operating in the country to assist Maduro’s security forces deal with regime opponents. Maduro’s foreign minister fanned the flames of Washington’s worry and anger by stating that Russia’s military involvement in his country might even increase. The United States has insisted on maintaining a sphere of influence in the Western Hemisphere since the proclamation of the Monroe Doctrine in the 1820s. Russia’s policy in Venezuela represents a direct challenge to that doctrine, and U.S. leaders should make it clear that a continuation of such behavior will have a markedly negative effect on bilateral relations. Cuba has been a foreign political and military client in the hemisphere for decades, precisely the situation the Monroe Doctrine aimed to prevent. The United States has no right or justification to dictate Venezuela’s internal governance, but it would be unwise to tolerate the establishment of a second hostile foreign client state. The Trump administration should insist that Russia respect the Monroe Doctrine and confine its Venezuelan ties to normal diplomatic and economic relations. At the same time, it is essential for U.S. officials to acknowledge that the United States and its NATO allies have shown contempt for Russia’s sphere of influence—and even its core security zone—in Eastern Europe. Washington’s roster of provocations is long and damaging. With strong U.S. encouragement, NATO’s membership has crept inexorably eastward, reaching the western border of the Russian Federation and even incorporating the three Baltic republics, which had been constituent parts of both Czarist Russia and the Soviet Union. Beginning with George W. Bush’s administration, Washington has pressed NATO to expand still farther and offer membership to both Georgia and Ukraine. The United States and its allies have greatly increased the number and scope of their military deployments and war games in Eastern Europe and the Black Sea. Barack Obama’s administration interfered blatantly in Ukraine’s internal political affairs to unseat a democratically elected, pro-Russian government and replace it with a pro-Western regime in 2014. Since then, Washington has made Ukraine a de facto military ally, training and conducting joint military exercises with Ukrainian forces and concluding two significant arms sales to Kiev. Moscow’s meddling in Venezuela likely is at least partially designed to be payback for Washington’s intrusive, provocative policies in Eastern Europe. The ingredients, therefore, exist for a sensible agreement embodying needed restraint on both sides. U.S. leaders should inform the Russian government that they are willing to end their quest to bring Ukraine and Georgia into NATO and to cease all military connections with Kiev and Tbilisi—including weapons sales and joint exercises. Washington also should offer to end its “rotational” deployment of troops, planes, and warships in Eastern Europe and the Black Sea. In other words, Washington would be willing to respect a Russian sphere of influence in that region. As a tradeoff, the Trump administration should insist that Moscow greatly dilute its involvement in Venezuela and Cuba; and the administration should suggest that it end a growing flirtation with Nicaragua’s leftist government. That retrenchment especially would require Russia to reverse its growing military presence anywhere in the Western Hemisphere. Such an offer requires greater realism on the part of U.S. policymakers and political leaders. Spheres of influence have always played a major role in international affairs, and despite assertions by prominent members of the American foreign policy community, they still do. All great powers seek to enforce their writ in their immediate neighborhood, and the avoidance of needless conflict requires a decent respect for that reality. Recent U.S. administrations have violated that important principle, and their behavior is producing retaliation and a spike in international tensions. The Trump administration can reverse that trend by insisting on Russia’s respect for the Monroe Doctrine while spurning the advice of hawks who think the United States can and should assert dominance in Ukraine and other portions of Eastern Europe. U.S. leaders would be wise to propose such a deal sooner rather later.
Transactional Foreign Policy Is Good Moscow views its foreign policy today in mostly transactional terms. Given the chance, Russia will negotiate and seek amicable deals with the West over key areas of concern. For Moscow, though, Washington must be willing to treat it as an equal. That’s a small price for Washington to pay. Think about it: unlike during the Cold War era, we have in Russia today a group of leaders who, while they may dislike us, still recognize that they must deal with America in order to achieve their aims. This means they will have to compromise. So will we. That’s politics, though. The alternative is that we keep fighting this pointless Cold War 2.0, diverting necessary resources and attention away from more pressing problems and into fighting a conflict we already won 30 years ago! Unable to accept that unipolarity is over (for now, at least), Washington’s permanent bipartisan fusion party refuses to deal fairly with Russia over the question of Ukraine. America’s leaders continue treating Russia like a pariah. This serves only to militate the Russian leadership against the West. The failure to properly deal with Russia over Ukraine has precipitated increasing tensions between the two nuclear powers just at the moment when such tensions should be drastically reduced.
It is unlikely that, had the United States dealt reasonably with Russia over Ukraine in 2014-2015, Moscow would have been compelled to intervene in Syria. Moscow sought to trade with Washington. When Russia intervened in Syria, Putin had hoped that he could effectively trade his position in the Mideast for a better Ukraine deal. That was a bad gambit and now Putin finds himself mired in Syria. With Venezuela, however, Putin believes he’s found the missing diplomatic link for his deal over Ukraine. After all, Venezuela is in the United States’ backyard. This is a fact that the White House national security adviser, John Bolton, publicly reiterated in recent days. Moscow seized on these comments to proffer their trade. As Russian political analyst Vladimir Frolov wrote in the Moscow Times, Russian leaders now believe Bolton’s comments are the window of opportunity they’ve been searching for to resolve their long-standing dispute with Washington over Ukraine. To anyone other than the democratic globalists who populate Washington, the trade is a no-brainer. If Venezuela could be turned into a democratic regime led by an American client, like Juan Guaido, then a nexus of pro-American democracies running from Brazil through Venezuela to Colombia would exist. This trio of states would be instrumental in not only slowing the illicit drug trade in the area, but it would also be integral in pushing back against undesired Cuban influence (Cuba being America’s most serious threat in the Western Hemisphere). Plus, the reintegration of Venezuela into the world system would allow for American oil companies to tap into Venezuela’s immense oil wealth while at the same time giving Washington the influence it needed to keep world oil prices low—meaning that Russia’s resurgence as a great military power could be stymied over the long-term (Russia is a petro-economy that needs a higher-than-average global oil price to thrive). Venezuela is in the United States’ historical sphere of influence, could be the missing link in an anti-Cuba alliance, and sits atop vast quantities of oil and natural gas—can someone explain how Syria is more important to U.S. foreign policy than Venezuela, please? The deal with Russia would be simple: Washington pressures Ukraine’s government to accept the basic outline of the Minsk II agreement that foundered in 2015 while Russia works in tandem with the United States to bring about a peaceful democratic transition in Venezuela. The Minsk II agreement would harm Ukrainian sovereignty by allowing Russia to have significant influence over Ukrainian security policies. Yet, just as Venezuela is a part of America’s sphere of influence, Ukraine is a part of Russia’s historical sphere of influence. And, we’d also be getting Russia, China, and Iran out of our sphere of influence while containing Cuba. We can (and should) lament the loss of sovereignty for these smaller states later. Alas, the limits of American power are being stretched to their breaking point and compromises must be made to save the core of our power base. Now is the time to protect our respective spheres of influence from the malign influence of external actors. Besides, if we can’t protect our own sphere of influence then how can we possibly be expected to defend countries farther afield?
Let’s Make a Deal Already Russia’s fellow autocracies, China, Cuba, Iran—even the supposed NATO member, Turkey—all support Nicolas Maduro. If President Trump threw President Putin a diplomatic bone on Ukraine, then, Putin would help to mitigate the ongoing crisis in Venezuela without risking a wider conflict. After all, it’s in Putin’s interest to rollback Western influence in his sphere of influence rather than continue to support Venezuela. Even if Russia could not persuade its autocratic quasi-allies in China, Iran, Cuba, or Turkey to totally abandon Maduro’s regime, that would only divide the autocrats among themselves—which would serve American interests in the long-term. The last thing Washington should want is united league of autocracies in Eurasia (which, presently, is being made a reality because of Washington’s hardline policies). In the first season of the Netflix series “House of Cards,” Kevin Spacey’s character, Frank Underwood, asked the audience what the best way to devour a whale was. His response is applicable to the budding alliance of autocracies in Eurasia: America must take a step back, look at the larger picture, and devour that autocratic alliance one bite at a time. President Trump is a transactional leader. So, too, is Vladimir Putin. Let’s do the mother-of-all geopolitical deals and get on with more pressing matters of state already. Neither Ukraine nor Venezuela are worth risking a wider war with Russia. And, despite what “experts” in the United States claim, Russia is a declining power with delusions of grandeur. American policy toward Russia has left Putin with little hope. Thus, as he is increasingly boxed in by the West and a rising China to his east, the likelihood of Putin lashing out militarily against the West is higher now than it has ever been.
"In reality, geopolitical implications of regime change in Venezuela are secondary for Russia," Demarais says. "In contrast with Syria, which hosts Russian military bases and lies on the periphery of Russia's sphere of interests, Venezuela has limited strategic significance." This week's meeting is just another active diplomatic effort by the U.S. to approach Russia and make them part of the transition process, given all the money they have invested there. There is a South American position on Venezuela -- led by Brazil and Colombia -- two countries Russia is friendly with and are probably getting a lot of flack for their support of Maduro. Russia is unlikely to put those relationships at risk just because of Maduro. "There is an increasing divide within the Russian political and economic elite about Venezuela. Cuba is the key actor," says Alejandro Arreaza, a Latin America economist at Barclays Capital.
Today, the United States finds itself in a new Cold War. This is not so much an ideological conflict as the last one was. Instead, it is a conflict about the definition of the new world order. Gone are the days following the end of the Cold War when the United States acted as the global hegemon seeking to institute its vision of a unipolar liberal world order. Now, the conflict rages between a nominally aligned axis of autocracies—loosely led by Moscow and Beijing—and the world’s democracies as represented by Washington, D.C. Unlike the 20th century Cold War, which was fought between revolutionary Communism and idealistic capitalism, the autocrats today appear to want only to create a multipolar world order where their regimes are not subject to wanton American military aggression. Theirs is less a campaign of aggressive revolution and more of a defensive policy meant to preserve their autocratic regimes. That may offend our sensibilities, but theirs is an entirely rational stance. Transactional Foreign Policy Is Good Moscow views its foreign policy today in mostly transactional terms. Given the chance, Russia will negotiate and seek amicable deals with the West over key areas of concern. For Moscow, though, Washington must be willing to treat it as an equal. That’s a small price for Washington to pay. Think about it: unlike during the Cold War era, we have in Russia today a group of leaders who, while they may dislike us, still recognize that they must deal with America in order to achieve their aims. This means they will have to compromise. So will we. That’s politics, though. The alternative is that we keep fighting this pointless Cold War 2.0, diverting necessary resources and attention away from more pressing problems and into fighting a conflict we already won 30 years ago! Unable to accept that unipolarity is over (for now, at least), Washington’s permanent bipartisan fusion party refuses to deal fairly with Russia over the question of Ukraine. America’s leaders continue treating Russia like a pariah. This serves only to militate the Russian leadership against the West. The failure to properly deal with Russia over Ukraine has precipitated increasing tensions between the two nuclear powers just at the moment when such tensions should be drastically reduced. It is unlikely that, had the United States dealt reasonably with Russia over Ukraine in 2014-2015, Moscow would have been compelled to intervene in Syria. Moscow sought to trade with Washington. When Russia intervened in Syria, Putin had hoped that he could effectively trade his position in the Mideast for a better Ukraine deal. That was a bad gambit and now Putin finds himself mired in Syria. With Venezuela, however, Putin believes he’s found the missing diplomatic link for his deal over Ukraine. After all, Venezuela is in the United States’ backyard. This is a fact that the White House national security adviser, John Bolton, publicly reiterated in recent days. Moscow seized on these comments to proffer their trade. As Russian political analyst Vladimir Frolov wrote in the Moscow Times, Russian leaders now believe Bolton’s comments are the window of opportunity they’ve been searching for to resolve their long-standing dispute with Washington over Ukraine. To anyone other than the democratic globalists who populate Washington, the trade is a no-brainer. If Venezuela could be turned into a democratic regime led by an American client, like Juan Guaido, then a nexus of pro-American democracies running from Brazil through Venezuela to Colombia would exist. This trio of states would be instrumental in not only slowing the illicit drug trade in the area, but it would also be integral in pushing back against undesired Cuban influence (Cuba being America’s most serious threat in the Western Hemisphere). Plus, the reintegration of Venezuela into the world system would allow for American oil companies to tap into Venezuela’s immense oil wealth while at the same time giving Washington the influence it needed to keep world oil prices low—meaning that Russia’s resurgence as a great military power could be stymied over the long-term (Russia is a petro-economy that needs a higher-than-average global oil price to thrive). Venezuela is in the United States’ historical sphere of influence, could be the missing link in an anti-Cuba alliance, and sits atop vast quantities of oil and natural gas—can someone explain how Syria is more important to U.S. foreign policy than Venezuela, please? The deal with Russia would be simple: Washington pressures Ukraine’s government to accept the basic outline of the Minsk II agreement that foundered in 2015 while Russia works in tandem with the United States to bring about a peaceful democratic transition in Venezuela. The Minsk II agreement would harm Ukrainian sovereignty by allowing Russia to have significant influence over Ukrainian security policies. Yet, just as Venezuela is a part of America’s sphere of influence, Ukraine is a part of Russia’s historical sphere of influence. And, we’d also be getting Russia, China, and Iran out of our sphere of influence while containing Cuba. We can (and should) lament the loss of sovereignty for these smaller states later. Alas, the limits of American power are being stretched to their breaking point and compromises must be made to save the core of our power base. Now is the time to protect our respective spheres of influence from the malign influence of external actors. Besides, if we can’t protect our own sphere of influence then how can we possibly be expected to defend countries farther afield? Let’s Make a Deal Already Russia’s fellow autocracies, China, Cuba, Iran—even the supposed NATO member, Turkey—all support Nicolas Maduro. If President Trump threw President Putin a diplomatic bone on Ukraine, then, Putin would help to mitigate the ongoing crisis in Venezuela without risking a wider conflict. After all, it’s in Putin’s interest to rollback Western influence in his sphere of influence rather than continue to support Venezuela. Even if Russia could not persuade its autocratic quasi-allies in China, Iran, Cuba, or Turkey to totally abandon Maduro’s regime, that would only divide the autocrats among themselves—which would serve American interests in the long-term. The last thing Washington should want is united league of autocracies in Eurasia (which, presently, is being made a reality because of Washington’s hardline policies). In the first season of the Netflix series “House of Cards,” Kevin Spacey’s character, Frank Underwood, asked the audience what the best way to devour a whale was. His response is applicable to the budding alliance of autocracies in Eurasia: America must take a step back, look at the larger picture, and devour that autocratic alliance one bite at a time. President Trump is a transactional leader. So, too, is Vladimir Putin. Let’s do the mother-of-all geopolitical deals and get on with more pressing matters of state already. Neither Ukraine nor Venezuela are worth risking a wider war with Russia. And, despite what “experts” in the United States claim, Russia is a declining power with delusions of grandeur. American policy toward Russia has left Putin with little hope. Thus, as he is increasingly boxed in by the West and a rising China to his east, the likelihood of Putin lashing out militarily against the West is higher now than it has ever been.
Today, the United States finds itself in a new Cold War. This is not so much an ideological conflict as the last one was. Instead, it is a conflict about the definition of the new world order. Gone are the days following the end of the Cold War when the United States acted as the global hegemon seeking to institute its vision of a unipolar liberal world order. Now, the conflict rages between a nominally aligned axis of autocracies—loosely led by Moscow and Beijing—and the world’s democracies as represented by Washington, D.C. Unlike the 20th century Cold War, which was fought between revolutionary Communism and idealistic capitalism, the autocrats today appear to want only to create a multipolar world order where their regimes are not subject to wanton American military aggression. Theirs is less a campaign of aggressive revolution and more of a defensive policy meant to preserve their autocratic regimes. That may offend our sensibilities, but theirs is an entirely rational stance. Transactional Foreign Policy Is Good Moscow views its foreign policy today in mostly transactional terms. Given the chance, Russia will negotiate and seek amicable deals with the West over key areas of concern. For Moscow, though, Washington must be willing to treat it as an equal. That’s a small price for Washington to pay. Think about it: unlike during the Cold War era, we have in Russia today a group of leaders who, while they may dislike us, still recognize that they must deal with America in order to achieve their aims. This means they will have to compromise. So will we. That’s politics, though. The alternative is that we keep fighting this pointless Cold War 2.0, diverting necessary resources and attention away from more pressing problems and into fighting a conflict we already won 30 years ago! Unable to accept that unipolarity is over (for now, at least), Washington’s permanent bipartisan fusion party refuses to deal fairly with Russia over the question of Ukraine. America’s leaders continue treating Russia like a pariah. This serves only to militate the Russian leadership against the West. The failure to properly deal with Russia over Ukraine has precipitated increasing tensions between the two nuclear powers just at the moment when such tensions should be drastically reduced. It is unlikely that, had the United States dealt reasonably with Russia over Ukraine in 2014-2015, Moscow would have been compelled to intervene in Syria. Moscow sought to trade with Washington. When Russia intervened in Syria, Putin had hoped that he could effectively trade his position in the Mideast for a better Ukraine deal. That was a bad gambit and now Putin finds himself mired in Syria. With Venezuela, however, Putin believes he’s found the missing diplomatic link for his deal over Ukraine. After all, Venezuela is in the United States’ backyard. This is a fact that the White House national security adviser, John Bolton, publicly reiterated in recent days. Moscow seized on these comments to proffer their trade. As Russian political analyst Vladimir Frolov wrote in the Moscow Times, Russian leaders now believe Bolton’s comments are the window of opportunity they’ve been searching for to resolve their long-standing dispute with Washington over Ukraine. To anyone other than the democratic globalists who populate Washington, the trade is a no-brainer. If Venezuela could be turned into a democratic regime led by an American client, like Juan Guaido, then a nexus of pro-American democracies running from Brazil through Venezuela to Colombia would exist. This trio of states would be instrumental in not only slowing the illicit drug trade in the area, but it would also be integral in pushing back against undesired Cuban influence (Cuba being America’s most serious threat in the Western Hemisphere). Plus, the reintegration of Venezuela into the world system would allow for American oil companies to tap into Venezuela’s immense oil wealth while at the same time giving Washington the influence it needed to keep world oil prices low—meaning that Russia’s resurgence as a great military power could be stymied over the long-term (Russia is a petro-economy that needs a higher-than-average global oil price to thrive).
A new era of great power competition took shape in Venezuela this past week. As the first battle of this epoch, the contest for the future of Venezuela will have outsized consequences on what forces and values – democratic or autocratic -- will determine not only the country’s future but also influence the regional and global future. As the country with the world’s largest proven oil reserves and one of its greatest humanitarian disasters, Venezuela is a place whose destiny in any case would have had outsized consequences for Latin America and global energy markets. Given the involvement of the U.S. and its democratic allies on the one side and China, Russia and Cuba on the other, the stakes are even higher geopolitically. President Trump’s recognition of interim President Juan Guaido on January 23, with the aim of forcing out Venezuelan dictator Nicolas Maduro, elevated the Venezuelan crisis to its most crucial test of his presidency and of the U.S. ability to shape affairs in its own hemisphere. It also marks an opening salvo of the Trump administration’s unfolding strategy to work with regional partners in a more concerted way. The former head of the Venezuelan National Assembly, Julio Borges, a leading player in the interim government, put it eloquently in Washington this week at the Atlantic Council. “The Berlin Wall is falling in Latin America,” he said. “What happened in Europe 30 years ago is happening now in the region.” It’s a useful if imperfect metaphor. Just as then in Germany, the outcome is uncertain, and the impact will be generational on democracy and freedom. The chances of success, however, depend on an even more complex interaction of local, regional and global players. Locally, Guaido thus far has succeeded where Maduro opponents previously failed in unifying the opposition, rallying widespread public and international support, and laying out a vision for the future that would bring free elections and provide amnesty for security and armed forces who are not found guilty of crimes against humanity. Regionally, the new Brazilian and Colombia leaders Jair Bolsonaro and Iván Duque, respectively, provide a significant boost to Venezuela’s chances at democratic change as part of the so-called “Lima Group,” a coalition of 14 Latin American countries plus Canada that is supporting democratic change in Venezuela. Just last month, the Lima Group issued a stinging condemnation of the Maduro regime, urging him to provisionally transfer executive power to the National Assembly and further restricting contacts with the Maduro regime. Globally, the picture is less certain and may be most decisive. The United States’ emerging strategy for Latin America was unveiled last November by National Security Advisor John Bolton in his “troika of tyranny” speech – putting Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba in the crosshairs. “The United States looks forward to watching each corner of the triangle fall: in Havana, in Caracas, in Managua,” Bolton said, though most at the time didn’t predict the pace of action. On the same day, the U.S. introduced new sanctions against Venezuela and Cuba, including on Venezuela’s gold sector and entities of the Cuban military and intelligence services. This week, the U.S. unveiled its most punitive economic actions yet against Venezuela, sanctioning its state-owned oil giant PdVSA, which remains the main source of income for the Maduro regime. It was the harshest measure yet against the Maduro regime and will immediately block $7 billion in assets and deprive Caracas of $11 billion in revenues in 2019, according to Bolton. What Washington is up against are three authoritarian countries who have bet to one extent or the other on the current Venezuelan leadership: Cuba, Russia and China. The current showdown is a test of just how far each of these actors will go to support its Venezuelan client – and how strategic the United States, Venezuela’s interim government and other Western democracies can be in navigating these shoals. The first indications are that a determined United States has a fair chance of helping to bring about a lasting change in Venezuela. Over years, Havana received subsidized oil from Caracas and Cubans have assumed sensitive posts in Venezuela’s government. The daily intelligence briefing Maduro, himself educated in Havana, receives isn’t prepared by Venezuelans but by Cuban intelligence operatives. Yet as deeply entrenched as Cuba remains, Maduro’s departure would rapidly undermine its position. Russia and China both seem to be hedging their bets, disappointed themselves at Maduro’s leadership and hoping to preserve their economic and political influence in the country in any case. Those include considerable Russia holdings in the Venezuelan energy market – and some $50 billion that China has extended in loans to Venezuela over the past dozen years, with some $20 billion still owed. Moscow is out in front in insisting that Maduro remains Venezuela’s legitimate leader, and that the United States is essentially supporting a parliamentary coup.
The Putin regime has built a conventional military machine that is capable of posing a significant threat to its immediate European neighbors, including members of NATO. According to the Defense Intelligence Agency's 2017 report, Russian Military Power: Although Russia's military strategy is officially defensive, the Russian Ground Troops' fundamental principle of land warfare is violent, sustained, and deep offensive action, just as it was during the Soviet era. Mechanized and armored formations supported by aviation and artillery are to seize the initiative at the outset of hostilities, penetrate the enemy's defenses, and drive deeply and decisively into the enemy's rear area. The strategic implications of these capabilities for Moscow were described by General Phillip Breedlove, former NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe, as far back as 2014: “They are absolutely able to bring great force to a position of readiness. That is something that we have to think about: What does that mean geo-strategically that we now have a nation that can produce this ready force and now has demonstrated that it will use that ready force to go across a sovereign boundary?” Russian conventional forces are capable of conducting a rapid, high-intensity campaign against the states on its immediate Western periphery. Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia – all NATO members – are particularly vulnerable to a conventional surprise attack. The RAND Corporation has intensively analyzed the military balance in the Baltic region. The conclusions of this effort are sobering: As currently postured, NATO cannot successfully defend the territory of its most exposed members. Across multiple games using a wide range of expert participants in and out of uniform playing both sides, the longest it has taken Russian forces to reach the outskirts of the Estonian and/or Latvian capitals of Tallinn and Riga, respectively, is 60 hours. Such a rapid defeat would leave NATO with a limited number of options, all bad. Moscow understands that it is at a serious disadvantage if confronted by the united economic and military power of the Western Alliance. Nor can it hope to win a protracted conflict. As a study by the Carnegie Endowment observed: Given the disparity in overall military and economic power, full-scale, prolonged, and conventional conflict with NATO would be likely to entail unsustainable losses for Russia. Any military options to challenge the West must, therefore, count on a swift resolution, exploiting Russia's local superiority before the full but distant potential of the West is brought to bear. To deter Russia from attempting to use its large and well-equipped ground forces either to intimidate its neighbors to the West or to conduct a lightning war against the Baltics, Poland, Ukraine or Romania, NATO must have a robust conventional capability deployed in Eastern Europe. The Obama Administration, which had withdrawn all U.S. heavy armored forces from Europe, realized its mistake following Russia’s invasion of Crimea and Eastern Ukraine. Reversing course, it created the European Reassurance Initiative which was meant to fund efforts to buttress NATO’s defenses. This included prepositioning sets of heavy equipment in Eastern Europe, the rotational deployment of an Armored Brigade Combat Team (ABCT) and a series of ever-growing NATO exercises involving relatively large numbers of ground forces. Given the growing Russian conventional threat to its eastern neighbors, including NATO members, more needs to be done. In particular, the U.S. and its NATO allies must deploy sufficient ground power to deter, if possible, and counter, if necessary, any Russian attempt at a “lightning strike” conventional offensive against these vulnerable countries. What is required are heavy forces including armored brigades, aviation formations, and long-range fires units, positioned in Eastern Europe. To be credible and to draw additional Alliance forces eastward, the central pillar of these new deployments must be from the U.S. Army. Additional NATO heavy forces would need to follow. Given the disparity in the balance of forward deployed Russian and NATO forces and Moscow’s advantages in shorter lines of communications, NATO forces must be deployed close to the Alliance’s eastern frontier if they are going to have any credible chance of halting a Russian offensive. Months ago, the United States began negotiating with Poland over the deployment of additional U.S. forces in the latter. The Polish government was hoping for the permanent deployment of a full U.S. armored division. Warsaw offered several locations where troops and equipment could be housed in addition to some $2 billion to defray the costs of operating a permanent base. Apparently, the United States and Poland agreed for the time being to deploy a more limited set of forces deployment than that which will be necessary to confidently deter Russia. The core of such a deployment would be elements of a full U.S. armored division, including an ABCT, elements of a division headquarters and some critical enablers. The ABCT will not be permanently stationed in Poland. Instead, units from the continental United States will be continually rotated forward. With an additional ABCT based on prepositioned vehicles and equipment and the airborne and Stryker brigades already forward deployed in Europe, the Army could form a capable heavy division. The decision to deploy key elements of an armored division to Poland is a step in the right direction. But it is only the first step. The next one should be to deploy a second rotational ABCT simultaneously to Poland. This would allow the U.S. Army to exercise a full division. Such a move would also be a strong signal to Russia that any conventional aggression against NATO’s eastern flank will be met with decisive force. Ultimately, if Russia continues its provocative behaviors towards NATO, it may be necessary to deploy U.S. forces forward permanently, up to a full heavy corps.
The conference, called the “U.S.-Ukraine Security Dialogue,” was organized by American-Ukrainian academic Walter Zaryckyj, and was sponsored by the American Foreign Policy Council, the Center for U.S.-Ukrainian relations, the Ukrainian Congress Committee of America, and the U.S-Ukraine Foundation. Carpenter said Russia is now dependent on an active conflict in the Donbas “to be able to sustain its regime of terror and warlordism” in the occupied territories, and to control its population, who have seen the economy and their quality of life become “a disaster.” He also believes Russia’s military strategists are looking for pretexts to strike deeper into Ukraine. He said this is difficult to do from “a cold start” where there is no conflict, but much easier if a sense of a “constantly slow-boiling” ongoing conflict is maintained – as the Kremlin is doing now. He said Moscow might choose a limited intrusion or a larger-scale operation, such as attempting to drive a land bridge from Crimea to the unrecognized state of Transnistria, or try to seize the canal system in Kherson Oblast, north of Crimea, which used to channel water from the Ukrainian mainland to the largely barren peninsula. Kyiv cut off the water supplies after the start of the conflict, and Crimea’s water reservoirs, according to some predictions, will run critically low this summer. “Russia relies on this hybrid strategy of fusing conventional capabilities, criminality – terrorism in fact – and irregular warfare to maintain this slow-boiling conflict and to probe the areas of government control in Ukraine where it feels perhaps it has the potential to engage in further offensive military action,” Carpenter said. He added that the Pentagon recognizes the Russian behavior as something it calls “Operational Preparation of the Environment” and sees such probes into Ukrainian-held territory almost daily. Carpenter said the Ukrainian military was currently doing an “admirable job” with very limited resources to keep the Russians at bay, and he outlined a number of measures the United States could take to help. US training However valuable the provision by Washington last year of deadly Javelin anti-tank missiles, their importance pales in comparison to the benefit of the training American forces has provided to the Ukrainian military, Carpenter said. He said the U.S. training is mostly at a basic level. It is still highly significant however, because it means there are American boots on the ground in Ukraine. “But we could be doing so much more,” he said, “and we could be sending our military advisers closer to the front lines to learn and study (Ukrainian methods), and to help them really maximize their effectiveness against the Russian enemy. This is something that the Pentagon could turn on very easily. It requires not a whole lot of additional funding, and it could be, and should be, done tomorrow. “We (America) have fetishized these (Javelin) missiles, thinking that this is the solution…,” Carpenter said. “The missiles are effective, but we need to be out there in the trenches, helping Ukrainian soldiers learn how to defend not only against the tactics of today, but the tactics of tomorrow, because Russia sees Donbas as a testing ground for all of its new equipment such as laser weapons which blind sentries, and thermobaric weapons. “Every new Russian weapon that comes on line is being tested in Donbas, and Ukrainian soldiers on the front lines are the guinea pigs in this Russian experiment. We need to be helping them identify not only the weapons but also the tactics that are being refined by the Russian military, and help our Ukrainian friends to combat and counter those tactics and weapons.”
To make military crises less likely to arise, but to prepare for meeting them if they do, the Trump administration should work with Washington’s NATO partners to prioritize three intertwined policy commitments. First, the Trump administration should continue to work with its NATO allies to deter Russia from threatening or undermining any NATO member. Deterrence can succeed not merely by threatening a punishing response to Russian aggression, as the most extreme measures of a tripwire strategy would entail, but also through simultaneous “deterrence by denial”—by making Russian aggression so costly, and with so few perceived benefits, that it is not worth pursuing. Second, the Trump administration should take reasonable actions alongside its NATO allies to reassure Russian political and military officials and the Russian public that the United States and NATO have defensive intentions and do not threaten Russian territory. The United States cannot stop Putin’s propaganda or overcome all deep-seated Russian suspicions about the West, but Congress should support Trump’s efforts to invalidate the image of the United States as Russia’s enemy that Putin has presented to his people. While it might appear that a commitment to reassure is in tension with the commitment to deter, in fact they can work together as a defensive strategy to make Europe more stable. A third commitment will help bring deterrence and reassurance into harmony: policy decisions should be based on consistent, transparent, rule-based criteria wherever possible. Law-abiding behavior will deflect Russian accusations of hypocrisy, and the United States will have an easier time uniting with its European allies to achieve shared aims if it shows that it continues to respect international law and institutions.
REASSURANCE MEASURES ■ Treat Russian leaders and the Russian state with respect. Trump’s initial comments about Putin have been complimentary. He is unlikely to replicate anytime soon Obama’s insulting 2013 statement that Putin seemed “like the bored kid in the back of the classroom” or 2014 characterization of Russia as a “regional power” (thereby dismissing Russia’s nuclear reach and UN veto), or former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s 2014 comparison of Putin to Hitler.62 But Trump is proud of making surprising and unvarnished comments in tweets and interviews. Even when U.S. interactions with Russia hit inevitable bumps, the Trump administration will achieve more if it remains diplomatic and unemotional, and helps Russian leaders save face at home. ■ Formally reaffirm President Trump’s message that the United States does not seek to impose “regime change” on Russia, while holding Putin accountable if he will not reciprocate, by tying this message to a new accord on limiting offensive cyber action against civilians in peacetime. In his inaugural address, Trump said: “We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone.” He should communicate the idea that avoiding a U.S. government crusade against the Russian regime serves U.S. and allied geopolitical interests. Members of the Trump administration and Congress should similarly accept that the United States has a limited ability to influence Russia’s internal political development, that Putin fears Western attempts to create regime change in Russia above all else, that these fears helped motivate Putin’s offensive cyber interference in the 2016 U.S. election, and that Putin’s worries undermine efforts to achieve stability in Europe. This does not mean that the United Sates cannot hold Putin accountable for Russian actions against the West—for example, by placing further sanctions against the Putin regime if Moscow does not forswear future “information war” interference in U.S. and other NATO countries’ domestic politics. To encourage reciprocity, the Trump administration should propose a cyber weapon limitation agreement with Putin, whereby each side agrees not to publicize emails and other data gained from hacking civilians in peacetime—and where violations reliably attributed to the Russian state are punished. Punishment could take the form of official publicity and condemnation of Russian violations, designed Reducing Tensions Between Russia and NATO to undermine international trust in Moscow and hence Russia’s ability to enter into other international agreements. It could also take the form of additional sanctions. As the United States is more vulnerable to escalatory activity in cyberspace, retaliation to Russian hacking through offensive cyber action should be considered only as a last resort. ■ Reaffirm the U.S. desire to maintain the NRFA. Some commentators have recommended shaming Russia for its aggression in Ukraine by declaring the NRFA null and void, given that it is based on principles of human rights and sovereignty recognition. But such a declaration would accomplish little and destroy the last remaining institutional framework for security cooperation with Russia in Europe. Even if Russia publicly disavows the NRFA, the State Department should continue to emphasize that the NRFA remains its preferred cornerstone of NATO-Russia relations. The United States and NATO should abrogate the NRFA only if Russia takes military or other seriously damaging action against a European NATO member state. ■ Work with allies to publicly clarify NATO’s understanding of its NRFA pledge of no “additional permanent stationing of substantial combat forces.” NATO leaders—including the U.S. ambassador to NATO and other officials at NATO headquarters—should push the alliance to increase the transparency of its interpretation of this pledge even while maintaining flexibility in absolute numbers for future negotiations with Russia. For example, NATO muddied the waters at its 2016 Warsaw Summit by calling its new deployments “rotating” battalions rather than clearly stating that they represent new long-term deployments that are consistent with the NRFA pledge. Although a clarification will likely not assuage the Putin regime, it will boost the credibility of the alliance at home and undercut Russian propaganda efforts in the Baltics and elsewhere to portray reasonable new NATO deployments as aggressive. ■ Support new conventional military deployments in Europe only up to the limit of NATO’s internal understanding of the 1999 A/CFE treaty requirements, unless Russia invades or seriously damages a NATO member state. The administration should work with its NATO allies to clarify that NATO has never accepted Russia’s demand for a three-brigade ceiling on an enlarged alliance’s total future deployments, but that it will limit its geographical flank deployments to retain consistency with the spirit of the CFE treaty Recommendations 35 process. NATO is right to argue that the A/CFE ceiling agreed upon for nineteen members in 1999 should not be the limit for the twentyeight allies today that span a much larger border with Russia. But no reasonable interpretation of the NRFA would permit what was suggested in the 2016 RAND study, of four additional brigades deployed to NATO’s northeastern flank on top of existing Baltics deployment levels. The Trump administration should firmly reiterate this position to both domestic critics and Central and East European allies who may push for more. This should not be read as a concession to Russia, since NATO need not match Russian conventional force levels to deter Russian military action, and a NATO buildup might actually harm its own security. ■ Publicly state that the United States believes Ukraine does not currently meet NATO membership standards and has a long way to go. While the precise standards for NATO membership accession are complex and worked out by NATO as a whole with each applicant state, there is a set of basic, agreed-upon political, economic, and security principles that new members must address, and Ukraine is at present far from meeting them.63 The criteria are designed to ensure that new members strengthen the alliance, rather than embroil NATO in unnecessary conflicts. Russian officials have stated that the prospect of NATO membership for Ukraine was one of the primary drivers of Moscow’s annexation of Crimea and its naval port of Sevastopol. An official State Department restatement of these NATO membership criteria would help reassure Russia about the limits of NATO enlargement while encouraging Ukrainian society to do more to move the country on the path of stable democratic development. Ukraine need not be a NATO member to receive support from the United States and other NATO countries.
Among the security professionals interviewed in Vilnius, assessments of the regional security environment spanned the entire spectrum, with some seeing it as better (due to greater Western attention and presence), others viewing it as largely unchanged (mostly referring to actual level of threats and provocations), and still others perceiving it as worse (with hybrid warfare discourse distracting from actual dangers of conventional conflict). The overall assessment of NATO’s response to date was very positive, with allied support for the Baltic states judged to be adequate and sufficient. There was a desire to see a greater presence of NATO (specifically US) troops on the ground, but political signaling was deemed of utmost importance, with any military deployments only serving to back it up. Somewhat curiously, discussions related to nuclear weapons and NATO policy and posture in this regard made the interviewees visibly uncomfortable; questions regarding the role and utility of such weapons, both strategic and tactical, were perceived as harkening back to the Cold War mentality and were avoided by interviewees, lest they appear to be challenging Lithuania’s non-nuclear weapon state status. In terms of perceptions of the nature and urgency of a direct military threat from Russia, most interviewees considered an actual armed attack against any Baltic territories highly unlikely. Bogged down in the conflict in Ukraine, Russia was seen as presently incapable of expanding its pursuit of territorial conquests. In further assessing low-probability but potentially high-impact scenarios, Kaliningrad (and transit routes to it) was seen as the most likely target of a potential Russian intervention. Several respondents also noted that Kaliningrad was the principle theater for Russian-NATO forces posturing and signaling, with deployments and exercises in this region being particularly sensitive. 25 Furthermore, Lithuanian experts emphasized the importance of credible NATO signaling, including steps to dissuade Russia from attempts to overrun the Baltics in a blitzkrieg, demonstrating the costly and non-localized nature of such a conflict. US troops on the ground and American statements of support and commitment to NATO defense were near unanimously viewed as key to deterring Russia. Similar support from European allies was viewed more as a useful complement to US efforts; while some noted positive developments in German and Portuguese engagement, others suggested that expecting more than the present European contribution would be futile, given the present economic and political environment in the continent. It is worth noting the somewhat paradoxical nature of these perceptions: greater commitment from presently less engaged European allies would arguably send a stronger signal of NATO unity and readiness for concerted action, yet the Baltics continue to view the United States as the principal underwriter of Baltic security.
The next key observation is that the evolving security context and disappearance of traditional alliance politics have led to the default mode of uses of “coalitions of the willing” and “alignments of convenience.”17 Especially in terms of operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, cohesion has become “challenged politically as well as militarily.”18 Moreover, threat assessment differentials in terms of dissimilar prioritization based on the perceived level of threat negatively affect alliance cohesion to a significant extent. In the past few years, cohesion waned as the multiplication of crises—including international terrorism, mass migration, and Russian foreign policy—deepened strategically the east-south division among NATO allies, and as the Alliance’s internal disputes intensified due to rising populism and Euroscepticism.19 While these various “domestic pressures and diverging threat perceptions are threatening to pull Allies apart,” cohesion “remains critically dependent on its collective defense commitment.”20 In outlining realist, economic, institutionalist, and social-constructivist theoretical perspectives, other categories of variables emerged: internal dimension of threats, bureaucracy and alliance institutionalization, and shared values and identity. What happens inside the Alliance could matter as much as what happens outside the Alliance. Given that NATO’s endurance had not conformed to the predictions of traditional alliance theory, Ohio University professor Patricia Weitsman suggested examining internal and external threat dyads in order to understand alliance cohesion.21 She found that NATO survived the end of the Cold War due to low internal threat, which concerns the politics of alliances. Consequently, this alliance cohesion theory says the lower the internal threat, the more cohesive the alliance; and the greater the external threat, the higher level of alliance cohesion.22 Another important factor in alliance cohesion is the way in which intra-alliance cooperation institutionalizes bureaucratic structures.23 For instance, some assert that consultative norms and structures can mitigate internal threats to cohesion.24 Furthermore, the Alliance’s institutional structures allow for information exchange among allies that can raise the level of alliance cohesion independently from external factors.25 Additionally, the transatlantic bond has depended on credible signaling (i.e., an ally’s trust in another’s assurances). Especially in the context of nuclear sharing, “weak signals” of U.S. commitment to Europe could damage NATO’s cohesion.26
The most catastrophic impact of NATO’s retirement would be the risk of Russian aggression and miscalculation. Without a clear commitment to defend allied territory backed up by an American nuclear deterrent, President Vladimir Putin will certainly see opportunities to seize land he believes is Russian. He has already done this in Georgia and Ukraine. Had they not joined NATO, the Baltic states would probably already be occupied by Russian troops. Certainly Putin would also see an opportunity to seize more of Ukraine without the “shadow” of NATO to protect it. History teaches us that major wars start when aggressive leaders miscalculate. German leader Adolf Hitler attacked Poland in 1939, believing that after then-British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain’s Munich Agreement, England would be unlikely to respond. North Korea attacked South Korea in 1950 after the United States appeared to remove Seoul from its defensive perimeter. Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990, believing the United States had signaled that it would not respond. In each case, miscalculation led to larger conflict. Secondly, NATO’s retirement would also decrease American military reach, its political influence and its economic advantage. American bases throughout Europe not only provide for the defense of Europe — they bring the U.S. a continent closer to trouble spots that threaten vital American interests. Fighting the Islamic State group, clearly an American interest, would have been markedly more difficult without permanent U.S. bases in Europe and without the American-built coalition that included every NATO nation. Without NATO, the mutual security interests that underpin both U.S. bases and coalition operations would be undermined. This extends to the economic realm. U.S. annual trade in goods and services with Europe exceeds $1 trillion, and U.S. total direct investment in Europe nears $3 trillion. These economic ties enhance U.S. prosperity and provide American jobs, but they require the degree of security now provided by NATO to endure. NATO’s retirement would thirdly exacerbate divisions within Europe. NATO’s glue not only holds European militaries together — it provides the principal forum to discuss and coordinate security issues. The European Union is unlikely to substitute for NATO in this respect because it has no military structure, few capabilities and no superpower leadership to bring divergent views together. Top of Form Bottom of Form Germany and France already seek a plan B should NATO collapse, but without the United Kingdom in the European Union, an all-European approach is likely to fail. The added insecurity of NATO’s collapse would also amplify current populist movements in Europe. The consequence could be renationalization of European militaries, a system that brought conflict to the 19th and early 20th centuries. The fourth consequences of life without NATO would be global. American bilateral alliances in Asia would each be shaken to their core should NATO fail. America’s defense commitments there would become worthless. With China determined to claim a dominant position in Asia, the collapse of NATO would cause America’s Asian partners to seek accommodation with China, much as the Philippines is in the process of doing. Trump’s decision to abandon the economic Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement has already given China new advantages in the region. Without credible American security commitments, there would be little to stop China from controlling the South China Sea and probably occupying Taiwan as well. Add to this equation the new footholds that China is building in central Asia, Africa and Europe: Abandoning NATO would help assure China’s competitive success. The final impact of NATO’s retirement would be the near collapse of what has been called the “liberal international order.” This order consists of treaties, alliances, agreements, institutions and modes of behavior mostly created by the United States in an effort to safeguard democracies. This order has kept relative peace in the trans-Atlantic space for seven decades. The Trump administration has begun to unravel elements of this order in the naive notion that they undercut American sovereignty. The entire European project is built on the edifice of this order. NATO is its principal keystone. Collapsing this edifice would undercut the multiple structures that have brought seven decades of peace and prosperity. So the answer is clear. Life without NATO would be more dangerous and less prosperous. Russia and China would be the big winners at America’s expense. NATO simply can’t retire. Yes, NATO has problems. It needs to be managed. But there is too much left to be done for retirement. And there is too much to lose if NATO fails.
U.S. companies are making a killing on foreign military sales With violent conflict and geopolitical tension rampant across the globe, U.S. military contractors are finding willing buyers for their wares across Europe, the Middle East and Asia, even as legislative wrangling and the looming return of sequestration caps threaten defense budgets at home. April saw the value of new foreign military sales jump three-fold over the same month a year ago, and May is off to a big start with some $3.5 billion in U.S. foreign military sales announced in the past week alone. Driven by regional unrest, foreign militaries are generally looking to upgrade their security forces with the latest systems that can give them a technological edge, says Guggenheim Securities defense analyst Roman Schweizer. The need for new security is pushing them towards U.S. defense contractors, who have what foreign militaries want. “There’s a pretty broad-based demand for these kinds of systems and U.S. companies have the technology that sets them apart,” Schweizer tells Fortune. “If foreign buyers have the ability to buy those things, they will.” And, it seems, they are. Among last week’s new orders are: More than 1.2 million rounds of ammunition for mortars and other weapons, valued at nearly $400 million. $47 million for 30 AIM-9X-2 Sidewinder missiles (plus 20 training missiles) for Indonesia, and 10 AIM-120 AMRAAM missiles for Malaysia costing $21 million (both missiles are made by Raytheon). One single $21-million Sikorsky UH-60M Black Hawk helicopter to transport the Jordanian royal family and government officials around the country. $3 billion from Japan for 17 V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft. Last week’s deals follow a busy April in which six foreign military deals totaled nearly $3 billion, eclipsing the $1.1 billion in sales made during the same month last year. A large chunk of April’s total was a $1.5 billion deal for Boeing (BA, -0.90%) to service Australia’s fleet of F/A-18 Super Hornet fighter jets and E/A-18 Growlers, but a significant amount also came from a $952 million deal with Pakistan for 1,000 Hellfire missiles (made by Lockheed Martin) and 15 Textron (TXT, +0.00%) built AH-1Z Viper attack helicopters. Largely absent from that accounting is a decision by Poland last month to buy Raytheon’s (RTN, -1.58%) Patriot air defense system, a deal that could ultimately be worth $5 billion. In some ways, a steady uptick in foreign military sales can be explained via a quick perusal of the international headlines. Chinese muscle-flexing in the South China Sea and elsewhere in the region is driving its neighbors—Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea and even the Philippines—to upgrade their capabilities, particularly in the air and at sea. Likewise, ordnance used in Saudi Air campaigns over Yemen and against the Islamic State must be replenished. But, the most significant driver of foreign military sales in the months and years ahead may be the conflict that has slipped below the fold as conflicts in the Middle East capture international headlines. Though a tenuous cease-fire in eastern Ukraine has tempered violence there somewhat, aggressive posturing by Russia is changing the defense calculus across Europe, Schweizer notes. “What the Russian government has done—that’s really changed the underpinnings of what’s been perceived as the European strategic framework over the past couple of decades,” he says. The shift in European defense thinking isn’t just philosophical, but material as well. In the last month, Sweden, Norway and Finland have all announced plans to boost defense spending in the near-term as air space violations by Russian jets and reported submarine sightings in those countries’ territorial waters have increased. Sweden plans to enhance its anti-air defenses, among other things. Finland has vocalized a need for new fighter jets. Per usual, the variable to keep an eye on all this is the price of crude, which dampens the buying power of several of the U.S. defense industry’s biggest buyers, particularly in the Middle East. “Is that going to affect the appetites of Middle Eastern buyers of U.S. weapons systems?” Schweizer asks. ‘That hasn’t been the case thus far, but these deals take awhile to put together. What matters is what the world looks like in six months.”
When you hear self-appointed experts on Russia banging on about how Russia is busy “weaponizing” everything from information to PhotoShop to Wikileaks to refugees to robotic cockroaches and Jedi mind tricks, one could be forgiven for wondering why the locus of their concern isn’t a bit closer to home. As opposed to these fictional charges against Russia, the actual weaponization of US foreign policy has been been continuing apace over the last several years. Since the Obama administration took office in 2009, US weapons exports have soared, resulting in a bonanza for weapons manufacturers. As of this writing, stock prices for the defense contractors L-3 Communications (LLL), Northrop Grumman (NOC), Raytheon (RTN), General Dynamics (GD), and Lockheed Martin (LMT) are at or near their respective five-year highs. As Nation contributor and the New America Foundation’s William Hartung recently observed, in 2014, “the United States was credited with more than half the value of all global arms transfer agreements.” In 2015 alone, the United States exported nearly $23 billion in weapons and by some estimates, the Obama administration has approved over $200 billion worth of arms sales since taking office. The United States now controls anywhere between 50 to 70 percent of the global arms market. Meanwhile, there is mounting evidence which suggests that US arms merchants are banking on a new and more dangerous cold war with Russia. As The Intercept reported last week, “Weapon makers have told investors that they are relying on tensions with Russia to fuel new business in the wake of Russian’s annexation of Crimea and modest increases in its military budget.” Perhaps not surprisingly, the country at the forefront of the push for a new cold war with Russia—Ukraine—has, since the crisis there began in the spring of 2014, turned itself into a veritable arms bazaar. The Obama administration has repeatedly boasted that by the end of 2015, Ukraine had received upwards of $780 million in US security assistance and $2 billion in loan guarantees, while Ukraine’s President Petro Poroshenko has made no secret of his intention to divert IMF loans to fund the war effort in the east. What has resulted is that, according to a recent AP report, “Ukraine has turned into a supermarket for illegal weapons.”
Congress authorized the government to provide Ukraine with air defense and coastal defense radars, naval mine and countermine capabilities, and littoral-zone and coastal defense vessels as part of the 2018 defense policy bill. That legislation was a response to Ukraine losing two-thirds of its naval fleet, which mostly was based in Sevastopol when Russia annexed Crimea. Ukraine has approximately 71 combat aircraft — older Su-27s and MiG-29s, according to the “Military Balance 2018” of the International Institute for Strategic Studies and no modern air defense system it might have used to contest Russian actions over the Kerch strait —. Its navy is less equipped — one frigate, 10 other surface combatants — and in no shape to challenge Russian dominance of Kerch. “A new Russian use of force may not compel Trump to respond, but it could energize Congressional efforts to outflank him with additional Russian sanctions,” Byron Callan, a defense sector analyst for Capital Alpha Partners, said in a note to investors. “There is not much time left in the lame duck session of Congress, but these efforts could gain new life in January-February.” The U.S. and Ukraine were in “close discussion” for Washington to supply another tranche of lethal weapons for Kiev’s fight in eastern Ukraine, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin told reporters Nov. 18, a day after Klimko met with U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in Washington. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s ranking member, Bob Menendez, D-N.J., in a statement on Monday urged Trump to commit to strong actions before the president meets with Putin at the G20 summit this week. “Once again, the Kremlin has shown that it only respects a strong adversary that is willing to stand up to bullies,” Menendez said. Menendez called for tougher sanctions, additional NATO exercises on the Black Sea and for the U.S. to send more security aid to Ukraine, “including lethal maritime equipment and weapons.” Menendez also warned the president against a repeat of his display at the U.S.-Russia summit in July, where Trump embraced Putin’s assertion that Russia did not interfere in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, over the analysis of U.S. intelligence agencies and his national security advisers. “At this precarious time, the U.S. cannot afford a weak performance by President Trump at the G20, like we saw in Helsinki. Mr. President this is your opportunity to finally show American leadership in defense of our principles and our close allies across Europe,” Menendez said.
WASHINGTON —The Trump administration has approved a plan to provide lethal weapons to Ukraine, U.S. officials said Friday, aiming to fortify the former Soviet republic military as it fights separatists backed by Russia. The new arms include American-made Javelin anti-tank missiles that Ukraine has long sought to boost its defenses against tanks that have rolled through eastern Ukraine during violence that has killed more than 10,000 since 2014. Previously, the U.S. has provided Ukraine with support equipment and training, and has let private companies sell some small arms like rifles. The officials describing the plan weren’t authorized to discuss it publicly and demanded anonymity. The move is likely to escalate tensions between the United States and Russia, as President Donald Trump contends with ongoing questions about whether he’s too hesitant to confront the Kremlin. Ukraine accuses Russia of sending the tanks, and the U.S. says Moscow is arming, training and fighting alongside the separatists. Trump had been considering the plan for some time after the State Department and the Pentagon signed off earlier this year. President Barack Obama also considered sending lethal weapons to Ukraine. The State Department, responsible for overseeing foreign military sales, would not confirm that anti-tank missiles or other lethal weapons would be sent. But in a statement late Friday, State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said the U.S. had decided to provide “enhanced defensive capabilities” to help Ukraine build its military long-term, defend its sovereignty and “deter further aggression.” “U.S. assistance is entirely defensive in nature, and as we have always said, Ukraine is a sovereign country and has a right to defend itself,” Nauert said. The White House’s National Security Council declined to comment. Although the portable Javelin anti-tank missiles can kill, proponents for granting them to Ukraine have long argued they are considered “defensive” because the Ukrainians would use them to defend their territory and deter the Russians, not to attack a foreign country or seize new territory. Under law, the State Department must tell Congress of planned foreign military sales, triggering a review period in which lawmakers can act to stop the sale. It was unclear whether the administration had formally notified Congress, but lawmakers are unlikely to try to block it given that Democrats and Republicans alike have long called on the government to take the step.
2018 defense bill authorized US to provide Ukraine maritime aid WASHINGTON — Lawmakers from both sides of the aisle are pressuring U.S. President Donald Trump to take a tougher line on Moscow after an incident at sea between Ukraine and Russia, which is ratcheting tensions between the two neighbors. Several lawmakers expressed concerns after the Ukrainian navy said Russian ships fired on and seized three of its artillery ships Sunday, wounding six Ukrainian crew members. Russia also closed the Kerch Strait, a key waterway between the Azov Sea and Black Sea, placing the two countries the closest they’ve been to open conflict since Moscow annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014. The incident suggests U.S. and European actions have failed to deter Russian aggression and raised the question whether Trump will attempt to rally allies. As the conflict unfolded on Sunday, Trump hit European partners with a Twitter attack over NATO burden-sharing: “The European Union, for many years, has taken advantage of us on Trade, and then they don’t live up to their Military commitment through NATO. Things must change fast!" Though several world leaders have blamed Russian aggression in the incident, Trump seemed reluctant to do so Monday when reporters asked how he felt about the clash. Trump said, “not good. Not happy about it at all,” adding, “we do not like what’s happening either way. And hopefully it will get straightened out.” On Monday, the House Foreign Affairs Committee’s ranking member, Rep. Eliot Engel, D-N.Y., said Trump was sending the wrong message, that NATO is divided and unwilling to react, just as Russian President Vladimir Putin is testing its resolve. Engel, likely to become the committee chairman when the House comes under Democratic control in January, called for a unified and forceful response from the U.S. and its allies, short of war. “We have to work with our allies in the NATO alliance, and what bothers me is President Trump has trashed the NATO alliance,” Engel told Defense News on Monday. “It’s very difficult when you have the president cozying up to Putin once again, not having a very strong response so far — letting Putin think there will be a lot of handwringing and talk, but not a lot of action.” “I think it was pretty poor taste and timing for the president to issue a statement about burden-sharing at a time when Russian expansion is full blown,” Engel added. “That sends a message to Russia that we’re thrashing our allies and not going to be willing to work in tandem with them and the NATO alliance.” Engel also repeated his support for sending Ukraine defensive weaponry, which could make Putin reconsider engaging in aggression. “If Putin starts seeing Russian soldier fatalities, that changes his equation,” Engel said. U.S. President Donald Trump said in a statement he reserves the right to ignore the defense authorization law’s ban on U.S. recognition of Russian sovereignty over Crimea, among 50 other provisions. Spain and Germany on Monday joined European Union calls on Russia to release Ukrainian sailors and ships, while U.S. Ambassador Nikki Haley — during a United Nations Security Council meeting Monday — called on Russia to “immediately cease its unlawful conduct” in the Black Sea. Russia, meanwhile, called Ukraine’s actions “dangerous” and said the three Ukrainian vessels illegally crossed into Russian waters. Senate Armed Services Committee chairman Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., threatened new sanctions on Russia, and called for a coordinated response between the U.S. and its European allies. “If Putin continues his Black Sea bullying, the United States and Europe must consider imposing additional sanctions on Russia, inserting a greater U.S. and NATO presence in the Black Sea region and increasing military assistance for Ukraine, as called for in the [2018 defense policy law],” Inhofe said in a statement Monday. Congress authorized the government to provide Ukraine with air defense and coastal defense radars, naval mine and countermine capabilities, and littoral-zone and coastal defense vessels as part of the 2018 defense policy bill. That legislation was a response to Ukraine losing two-thirds of its naval fleet, which mostly was based in Sevastopol when Russia annexed Crimea. Ukraine has approximately 71 combat aircraft — older Su-27s and MiG-29s, according to the “Military Balance 2018” of the International Institute for Strategic Studies — and no modern air defense system it might have used to contest Russian actions over the Kerch strait. Its navy is less equipped — one frigate, 10 other surface combatants — and in no shape to challenge Russian dominance of Kerch. “A new Russian use of force may not compel Trump to respond, but it could energize Congressional efforts to outflank him with additional Russian sanctions,” Byron Callan, a defense sector analyst for Capital Alpha Partners, said in a note to investors. “There is not much time left in the lame duck session of Congress, but these efforts could gain new life in January-February.” The U.S. and Ukraine were in “close discussion” for Washington to supply another tranche of lethal weapons for Kiev’s fight in eastern Ukraine, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin told reporters Nov. 18, a day after Klimko met with U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in Washington. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s ranking member, Bob Menendez, D-N.J., in a statement on Monday urged Trump to commit to strong actions before the president meets with Putin at the G20 summit this week. “Once again, the Kremlin has shown that it only respects a strong adversary that is willing to stand up to bullies,” Menendez said. Menendez called for tougher sanctions, additional NATO exercises on the Black Sea and for the U.S. to send more security aid to Ukraine, “including lethal maritime equipment and weapons.” Menendez also warned the president against a repeat of his display at the U.S.-Russia summit in July, where Trump embraced Putin’s assertion that Russia did not interfere in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, over the analysis of U.S. intelligence agencies and his national security advisers. “At this precarious time, the U.S. cannot afford a weak performance by President Trump at the G20, like we saw in Helsinki. Mr. President this is your opportunity to finally show American leadership in defense of our principles and our close allies across Europe,” Menendez said. Congress, Menendez added, should pass the bipartisan “Defending American Security from Kremlin Aggression Act,” sponsored earlier this year by Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. The bill adds measures to strengthen NATO and fight cybercrime, as well as new Russia sanctions on “persons that facilitate illicit and corrupt activities, directly or indirectly, on behalf of Vladimir Putin.” In a tweet on Monday, the Republican co-chairman of the Senate Ukraine Caucus, Sen. Rob Portman, of Ohio, condemned Russia’s “unprovoked and unwarranted aggression” against the Ukrainian navy in the Azov Sea. He also called the blocking of the ships “an unlawful, hostile action” and said the U.S. "should join the international community in condemning it.” Portman credited the administration for authorizing the use of lethal aid and facilitating the transfer of two excess Coast Guard patrol boats to the Ukrainian navy. “That being said, we can, and should look to do more for the Ukrainians with both lethal and non-lethal aid,” Portman said in a separate statement on Monday. "We need to help the Ukrainian people to not only build their military capabilities, but also strengthen their democratic institutions. I will continue to take every opportunity to find ways to help Ukraine — legislatively and otherwise. They are a valued ally who need and deserve our continued support.” The ranking member of the House Armed Services Committee’s sea power subpanel, Rep. Joe Courtney, D-Conn., called on the United Nations to “sanction this outrage.” Courtney expressed support for the Ukrainian navy’s right to pass through the Kerch Strait, as governed by international law and bilateral agreements — “not arbitrary Russian diktats ‘closing’ access to Ukrainian territorial waters.”
Russian military aggression has made many Ukrainians feel that Ukraine cannot guarantee its own security and therefore it needs to be part of a security organisation. Opinion polls show that today some 60-70 per cent of Ukrainians participating in a referendum would support NATO membership. This is higher than those who supported NATO membership in the Hungarian and Slovenian referendums. Ukrainians who support NATO membership are actively lobbying for this goal while those who are opposed have decreased in number since 2014 and are far more passive than the supporters. Many former opponents of NATO membership are today supporting a “non-bloc” status for Ukraine. The biggest change has been in eastern Ukraine where support has grown from 12 to 32 per cent and in the south where it has increased from 7 to 33 per cent. Even in the Donbas, support stands at 12 per cent where it was practically zero prior to 2014. Pro-Russian political parties have either disintegrated (Party of Regions), or become illegal (Communist Party). There is little homegrown anti-Americanism in Ukraine. The majority of nationalists and populists throughout Europe are anti-NATO, anti-American and pro-Putin. Ukrainian nationalists are anti-Putin, pro-NATO and not anti-American.
WASHINGTON (CN) – The Defense Department said Tuesday it will send $250 million more in military equipment to war-torn Ukraine. The announcement – which brings the U.S. security assistance up to $1.5 billion – came just hours before members of Congress convened to assess how to continue supporting Ukraine in its fight for sovereignty from its powerhouse neighbor Russia. Ukraine represents ground zero in the U.S.-Russia conflict, Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin said in Tuesday’s Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing. Senators agreed on continued need for U.S. support of Ukraine following the election of President Volodymyr Zelensky in May.
Signals from the Trump administration are beginning to indicate a new direction in the United States’ support of Ukraine. At the end of August, Secretary of Defense James Mattis stated that the Pentagon is “actively reviewing” the issue of defensive weapons, rightly noting that “defensive weapons are not provocative unless you are an aggressor, and clearly Ukraine is not an aggressor since it is their own territory where the fighting is happening.” Arming Ukraine would enable the United States to directly support an independent Ukraine and add to the overall security of Europe. Yet it goes without saying that such a move needs to be done intelligently and with the specific aim of improving the situation. Clearly, the United States and its allies in Europe do not want a military confrontation with Russia, especially with a possible conflict with North Korea looming on the horizon. And here lies the most important point in providing defensive weapons to Ukraine: they would act as a deterrent against Russian encroachment further into Ukrainian territory, not a provocation. Several op-eds have recently argued against this policy. The Wilson Center’s Michael Kofman argued in the New York Times that arming Ukraine would drag the United States into a proxy war with Russia, one it cannot win. He compares the plan for Ukraine with US policy of arming and training the opposition in Syria. Such an erroneous, even outrageous, comparison should almost immediately discredit Kofman’s arguments. L. Todd Wood in The Washington Times went even further, misleadingly comparing the arming of Ukraine with “arming Texas against the United States,” and adding unfounded speculations about a war between the United States and Russia over Ukraine. Ukraine is not Syria, nor is it Texas, and the conflict it is involved in is with an outside aggressor. It is not engaged in a civil war, nor is it fighting non-state actors like ISIS. Simply put, it is in a struggle for its own survival as a European state with Western principles, values, and politics. The constant flow of weapons and military support from Russia to the conflict zone continuously violates the ceasefire, causing casualties among the Ukrainian military and peaceful civilians in the Donbas. Providing defensive weapons to Ukraine will not provoke an arms race, since Moscow has already provided fighters in the Donbas with its most modern and advanced weapons. Moreover, enhancing Kyiv’s defensive capabilities will not lead to a direct US-Russia conflict, because Ukraine has no plans to attack Russian territory, and the United States will not send its troops to fight in Ukraine. Instead, defensive weapons can help Ukraine more effectively defend its territory and citizens, deprive Russian forces in the Donbas of their current technical advantages, and ultimately force Moscow to think twice before escalating further. It is no coincidence that shortly after the talks about arming Ukraine intensified, Russian President Vladimir Putin announced Russia’s readiness to agree to a UN peacekeeping mission in the Donbas—an idea that Moscow had been rejecting for years. Supporting Ukraine’s defensive abilities would also further reinforce NATO’s existing strategy of deterrence in the region. Therefore, a strong argument exists for arming Ukraine with defensive weapons. But by doing so, the Trump administration should add five conditions to this policy.
THE TRUMP administration hesitated for months over whether to provide Ukraine with defensive weapons, but when it finally acted this last week, its timing was impeccable. Aggression by Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine rose sharply in mid-December: Heavy artillery and rocket barrages belied the notion that Moscow's three-year-old intervention in the provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk had settled into a "frozen conflict." There was speculation that Vladi­mir Putin saw escalation in Ukraine as a way of rallying domestic support ahead of a March presidential election. President Trump's decision to supply Ukrainian forces with Javelin antitank missiles and approve the commercial sale of sniper rifles, wouldn't stop a Russian offensive if there were one — but it could give Mr. Putin pause. It's a worthy application of the "peace through strength" principle of President Ronald Reagan that Mr. Trump says he admires. If there is ever to be peace in Ukraine — and an improvement in U.S.-Russian relations — Mr. Putin must first be made to understand that his aggressions, whether in Ukraine or in cyberspace, will be resisted and will incur tangible costs. The quantities of U.S. weapons Ukraine is obtaining are modest. But officials call them "gap-fillers" because they remedy key weaknesses in the country's defenses. On the eastern front lines, sniping is a daily peril for Ukrainian troops, who will be able to use the Model M107A1 sniper systems they are being sold to level the field. Similarly, the Javelins can take out Russian tanks in the event of a new offensive — and force the Kremlin to consider the potential cost in the lives of Russian soldiers it still denies are in Ukraine. In authorizing the sales, Mr. Trump reverses the stance of President Barack Obama, who rejected proposals by his advisers and pressure from Congress to provide Kiev with lethal weapons. Mr. Obama reasoned that arms supplies would merely motivate further escalation by Russia. We will now see, at last, whether that was a sensible rationale or an excuse for inaction. So far the reaction from Moscow has been muted. The foreign ministry has issued predictable protests, but nothing has been heard from Mr. Putin. This Last week a large prisoner exchange between Ukraine and the Russian-backed separatists went forward without incident, and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov agreed in a phone call that talks on a peace settlement should continue. Once the Potemkin show of the March 18 election is behind him, Mr. Putin may have reason to consider cutting his losses in Donetsk and Luhansk. To its credit, the Trump administration has made clear, most recently in an op-ed by Mr. Tillerson in the New York Times, that the normalization of U.S.-Russian relations cannot occur "absent a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine situation." Picking up on a statement by Mr. Putin, the Trump administration and European allies are offering to negotiate a plan for international peacekeepers who could deploy following a Russian withdrawal. If Mr. Putin really wants to reset relations with the West, he will have an opportunity. If not, it will be well that Ukraine will have more means to defend itself.
In the coming weeks, President Donald Trump will decide whether to approve the sale of U.S. weapons, including advanced anti-tank weapons, to Ukraine. Russia invaded Ukraine. Russia illegally occupies Crimea. Russia provoked and now supports a separatist movement in eastern Ukraine that did not previously exist. Russia is the aggressor and Ukraine is the victim. Every country has the right to self-defense. The people of Ukraine have shown a commitment to the transatlantic community, and the U.S. should provide advanced weapons and other tactical enablers, such as secure communications, to the Ukrainians. However, doing so should not be viewed as a single silver bullet in solving the crisis and ending Russian aggression. America’s Interests It is in America’s interest that Ukraine remain independent and sovereign, and maintains the ability to choose its own destiny without outside interference. Ukraine is in the midst of a national struggle that will determine its future geopolitical orientation—the West or Moscow. The outcome of this struggle will have long-term implications for the transatlantic community and the notion of national sovereignty. Since 2014, almost 5 percent of Ukraine’s landmass and more than half of its coastline have been under illegal Russian occupation in Crimea. In eastern Ukraine, Russia and Russian-backed separatists continue to propagate a war that has resulted in more than 10,000 lives lost, 23,000 wounded, and an internally displaced population of almost 1.8 million people; inflicted heavy damage on the Ukrainian economy; and slowed Ukraine’s progress toward deepening ties in the transatlantic community. Fighting in the Donbas The separatists fighting in eastern Ukraine are Russian-backed, Russian-trained, and Russian-equipped. These soldiers are kitted out in the latest military gear and wearing uniforms with Russian military insignias. Military hardware such as T-72B3 tanks—which are not in the Ukrainian military’s inventory—are being used in eastern Ukraine. In an era of prolific social media, this kind of major incursion can no longer be hidden from the outside world. There is no reason to believe that the cease-fire agreement will last when many such agreements have failed in the past. At this moment of crisis for Ukraine, the U.S. should be ready to help the people of Ukraine defend themselves by sending vital weapons and equipment in a responsible way. The Time Is Now So far, the U.S. has provided around $750 million in military hardware to Ukraine, all of which has been “non-lethal.” When the U.S. decides to provide weapons, especially advanced weapon systems, to a partner the decision should never be taken lightly. During the early days of 2014, the idea of introducing advanced U.S. weaponry onto the battlefield would have been dangerous, as the Ukrainian military was in disarray. However, the situation since 2014 has changed drastically. The U.S. should supply weapons to the Ukraine now, for the following three reasons: Ukraine has the right to self-defense. Each country has the inherent right to self-defense. In the case of Ukraine, Russia is the invader and the aggressor. Ukraine is the victim. Russia is clearly interested only in escalating violence and not in helping deliver peace. Various cease-fires over the years have merely bought Russia and the separatists more time. The idea that Moscow is committed to a peaceful resolution to the war in eastern Ukraine is fanciful. Ukraine is committed to the transatlantic community. In 2014, it was unclear in which direction Ukraine was heading. This is no longer the case. The Ukrainian people have shown, whether on the streets of the Maidan or via the ballot box through multiple elections, that they see their future as part of the West, not under Russian domination. As recently as 2013, closer ties with the West were discouraged by Ukraine’s leaders. Since Russian-backed President Viktor Yanukovich’s disposal from office in February 2014 this has all changed. The current president, Petro Poroshenko, is committed to closer relations with the West and to resisting Russian aggression. The frontlines are relatively stabilized. When Russia first backed the separatists, the situation on the ground was chaotic. Nobody knew how far the separatists would go and when they would be stopped. The Ukrainian military was in disarray, and flooding the battlefield with advanced Western weaponry would have been dangerous. The situation is now different. A frontline and a traditional linear battlefield now exist. The Ukrainian military has shown its ability to defend territory. Thanks to international training, the Ukrainian military is professional, capable, and has demonstrated their ability to handle advanced weapons.
The diplomatic area is another very significant area in which Ukraine must counteract Russian hybrid aggression. Ukraine intensifies the processes of European and Euro-Atlantic integration, a legally established foreign policy course designed to bring Ukraine back to a united Europe. With attention to these directions, since June 11, 2017, Ukrainian citizens have been able to travel to the countries of the European Union without visa documents. The provision of visa-free travel by the EU has a historic significance for Ukraine and demonstrates the final break of Kyiv with the post-Soviet past.226 Now, Ukrainians can travel without visas to 134 countries of the world.227 Diplomacy is also critical because counteracting Russian hybrid aggression requires the consolidation of the efforts of other states, building anti-Putin’s allies, and ensuring the recognition of the Russian Federation’s status as an aggressor, and the continuation of the West’s sanction policy. Despite all Moscow’s efforts to split the Allied countries that support Ukraine, these Western countries continue to implement a policy of countering the aggressor. A vivid example of this steadfastness is the prolongation of sanctions imposed on Russia. The European Union has repeatedly prolonged anti-Russian sanctions over the past years. The Russian delegation did not participate in the PACE meetings in 2018; it was therefore not able to achieve the lifting of restrictions imposed in 2014 against it. The fact that such successes were achieved in the face of a rigid opposition 225 Analytical Report of the President of Ukraine to the Verkhovna Rada “About Internal and External Status of Ukraine in 2018.” 226 “Ukraine Hails Visa-free Travel to European Union,” from the Russian leadership, which increased its pressure on certain European powers, demonstrates the professionalism of Ukrainian diplomats. 228 Ukrainian diplomacy also makes an important contribution to improving Ukraine’s defense capability. The clearest example of this contribution is the use of diplomacy to ensure the supply of American lethal weapons to Ukraine. The U.S. Congress approved a package of aid worth US$47 million, in which Ukraine received 37 anti-tank launchers “Javelin” and 210 missiles for them.229 The American armaments have already arrived in Ukrainian territory, and the soldiers of the Armed Forces of Ukraine have begun to familiarize themselves with the equipment. Additionally, in May 2018, the U.S. Congress also approved US$250 million of military assistance to Ukraine for 2019, and Washington is ready to enlarge arms supplies to Ukraine to build up Ukrainian air defense forces and its navy.230 Thus, the Ukrainian diplomatic service demonstrates a comprehensive approach to the realization of its functions; Ukrainian diplomacy is aimed primarily at implementing the strategic goals of Ukrainian foreign policy: preventing the collapse of the Western antiPutin coalition, keeping the world’s attention on events in Ukraine, recognizing the official level of aggressiveness of Russian politics, and, as a result, extension of economic sanctions. The crisis of the modern international environment and the presence of direct and hybrid threats to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine require the continuation of this hard work.
Meanwhile, Europe gets a free ride on the Ukrainian army’s defense effort. Ukrainians have shown that Russia can be resisted; this is heartening to the Baltic countries and reduces defeatism more broadly in Eastern Europe. Western Europeans can have both economic relations with Russia and military security, for their security risks have been externalized to the Ukrainian army. This perhaps explains Western Europeans’ complacency in the face of Russian threats.
On November 25, Russia fired on the Ukrainian Navy in the Black Sea, injuring at least two Ukrainian sailors. Many experts have warned that Russia is opening a new front in its forgotten war in Ukraine on the Black and Azov Seas, illegally boarding commercial Ukrainian vessels and increasing its military presence to about 120 patrol boats and ships. The Russian MFA twitter feed is full of insinuations about a Ukrainian provocation. We asked Atlantic Council experts and friends the following: How should Ukraine respond? How should NATO and the West react to this latest round of Russian aggression? What would it take to force the Kremlin to stop its menacing actions in Ukraine and around the world? Anders Åslund, Senior Fellow at the Atlantic Council: Ukraine is protesting as it should, but so far I have only heard protests from Estonia and Latvia. The United States, NATO, the European Union, and all major Western countries should protest sharply against this violation of the freedom of the sea under several international sea conventions. NATO and the United States should send naval ships into the Black Sea into the neighborhood of the Sea of Azov to guarantee that it stays open to international shipping. This would be in full compliance with the UN Law of the Sea Convention of 1982 and the Montreux Convention on the regime of the straits of 1936. Taras Berezovets, TV Host of Телеканал Прямий, Founder of Ukrainian Institute of the Future, and Founder and CEO of Free Crimea: I believe this is a moment of truth for the West. It’s the first time that the Russian military has attacked Ukrainian armed forces under Russian flags. It’s not little green men anymore. It’s an open act of aggression. So the response of Ukraine and Western allies to this clear and present danger should be resolute. If Russia is not deterred in the Azov Sea, we might see very soon open Russian aggression in the Donbas. The West should shut down SWIFT, slap on oil embargoes against the Russian Federation, and enlarge military assistance to Ukraine. The US should sanction Nord Stream 2. NATO should increase its military presence in the Black Sea to send a message to Russian President Vladimir Putin. Ukraine should declare martial law, impose visa regime, and break the 2003 Azov Sea Treaty. Ian Brzezinski, Senior Fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center on International Security (from Twitter): This is not a provocation but military aggression by Russia against Ukraine. Putin is testing the West’s resolve. The West’s response should include sectoral economic sanctions and transfer of more lethal assistance to Ukraine, including anti-ship missiles. Michael Carpenter, former US Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, Senior Director at the Biden Center, and Nonresident Senior Fellow at the Atlantic Council: Russia's seizure of Ukrainian ships transiting the Kerch Strait between the Black and Azov Seas is a part of a larger Russian strategy to gain control over the Azov Sea and blockade Ukrainian maritime traffic in and out of the Kerch Strait. This move is clearly a violation of international law and adds a new dimension to Russia's four-and-a-half-year-old war against Ukraine. The United States should respond immediately by giving Ukraine radars to boost its maritime domain awareness and land-based anti-ship missiles so it can defend its Azov Sea littoral. The United States should also impose a complete asset freeze on at least one major Russian bank, such as Sberbank, VTB, or Gazprombank. The sanctioning of a Russian bank—or several banks if Russia fails to respond initially—should be made conditional on Russia restoring Ukraine's access to its own ports and withdrawing its troops from the Donbas. Until this happens, the costs on the Kremlin should continue to mount. Peter Dickinson, Nonresident Fellow at the Atlantic Council and Publisher, Business Ukraine Magazine: This naval attack is an act of war under virtually any interpretation of international law. At its heart lies the Kremlin's claim to Crimea, which remains unrecognized outside of Russia itself. The international community must learn the lessons of 2014 and prevent Moscow from closing the Kerch Strait and creating new military realities on the ground. The most effective way of doing this would be to send a multinational naval task force to pass through the Kerch Strait without delay and dock at Mariupol. This would test Moscow’s resolve and expose the limitations of Russian bullying. Failure to do this will lead to the long-term blockade of Ukraine’s southeastern seaboard and mounting Russian efforts to disrupt shipping to the Odesa region, bringing the world significantly closer to a major conflict escalation. One thing is certain, the time for expressions of grave concern is long over. John Herbst, Director of the Eurasia Center and former US Ambassador to Ukraine: If the West does not react—and if Western media facilitate this by focusing on sideshows like "Martial Law"—then Putin will have won another gamble. Adrian Karatnycky, Senior Fellow at the Atlantic Council's Eurasia Center and Managing Partner of Myrmidon Group LLC: Ukraine has been facing sustained Russian funded subversion from within and clandestine Russian military operations for the last five years. Now it is facing open aggression from without. Ukraine needs to be at the highest footing of military preparedness and internal vigilance, while maintaining the widest scope for civic and political liberties. NATO, the United States, and the West should respond with a ratcheting up of sanctions, creating a much larger naval presence in the Black Sea, and increasing lethal military assistance to Ukraine. Increased sanctions are also called for and if Russia persists in its military aggression, the expulsion of Russia from the SWIFT banking system should be implemented. Phillip A. Karber, President of the Potomac Foundation: By any standard of international behavior—invasion and occupation of sovereign territory, attack on peaceful shipping, high levels of violence, and repeated violation of international law—Russia is waging war on Ukraine. Ukraine has been under daily attack for almost five years—longer than America was in World War II. How much longer can Ukrainians hold the line alone, and what are the consequences for Europe and the United States when they can’t? Its time to spell it like it smells—its war! Russia has not been stopped by sanctions, platitudes or the Minsk II ceasefire. Like bullies everywhere they only understand force. The issue is not about “declarations” but decisive action: Ukraine needs to go on a full wartime level of mobilization; The West needs to provide the financial support—a real “lend lease” program—to make that possible; The Ukrainian military needs to be re-equipped with modern Western military technology; NATO needs Ukraine as much as Ukraine needs to be a member of the Alliance, the sooner that is consummated the better; Only the United States can incentivize Russia to stop the war—by providing Ukraine with the hardware needed to sustain a long-term competitive posture and taking a leadership role at the peace table. Maksym Khylko, Chairman of the Board at the East European Security Research Initiative Foundation and Senior Research Fellow at the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv: First, the Russian attack against Ukrainian naval ships should be recognized at the international level as an act of aggression against Ukraine with all of the following international legal implications. Second, a set of further sanctions should be imposed on Russia to punish it for the escalation of aggression. Third, with the assistance of its Western partners, Ukraine should multiply its efforts to strengthen the defense of the Azov Sea coast. At the same time, NATO should increase its military presence in the Black Sea. Fourth, the West should consider a set of measures to help Ukraine compensate economic losses caused by Russia's illegal shipping restrictions in the Azov Sea. Fifth, it’s high time for Kyiv to seriously consider the termination of the Ukraine-Russia Treaty on Cooperation in the Use of the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait of 2003, and of diplomatic relations with Russia. Volodymyr Ogrysko, former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and CEO of the Center for Russian Studies in Kyiv: Russia has opened a hot new front against Ukraine, this time in the Black Sea region. In my view, the first reaction of Ukrainian government is adequate. Ukrainian troops have been brought to full combat readiness. The Verkhova Rada will introduce martial law that should cover the whole territory of Ukraine. We in Ukraine should consider very tough bilateral measures, including breaking diplomatic relations with Russia, stopping trans-border movement for individuals, and imposing a visa regime as well as a total trade embargo for all Russian goods. And of course, any pro-Russian fifth columns should be blocked in Ukraine. What should our Western partners do? First, realize that Russian aggression is not only against Ukraine. It is also against the West. Second, stop delivering statements like “we are concerned.” This time is over. It’s time to react. The West should react in three ways: Punish Russia by imposing not only personal or targeted sanctions but also introducing sectoral sanctions, including on the financial sector, import of all know-how goods especially for oil and gas industry and any dual-use goods, and banning Russian airplanes from entering the air space of NATO counties. Increase NATO’s military presence in the Black Sea and start military patrol over the region by inviting Ukraine and Georgia to join. Start a full-scale “lend–lease military program” for Ukraine as a practical step according to the Budapest Memorandum. The United States, the United Kingdom, and France should show their leadership. Only by combining our efforts can we stop the Russian aggressor. Steven Pifer, William J. Perry fellow at Stanford and nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution: The November 25 incidents in the Kerch Strait and Russia’s closure of the strait suggest that Moscow is opening a new phase in its conflict against Ukraine. That blockade halts shipping to the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol, Berdyansk and others on the Sea of Azov that are important trade outlets for eastern Ukraine. That will increase economic pressure on Kyiv in the run-up to the March presidential election. Russia’s blockade of the Kerch Strait is illegal under international law. The United States and Europe should make clear their readiness to impose new sanctions on Russia if the strait is not reopened immediately. Those sanctions should include measures to target exports and imports through Russian ports on the Sea of Azov and Black Sea, e.g., by banning US- and EU member state-flagged ships from calling on those ports and by not allowing ships that originate at those Russian ports to enter U.S. or European harbors. Anders Fogh Rasmussen, CEO of Rasmussen Global, Founder of Alliance of Democracies, former NATO Secretary General, and Prime Minister of Denmark (from Twitter): Russia’s aggression in the Sea of Azov must stop immediately: after ramming a Ukrainian ship, they have now opened fire. Moscow’s illegal actions must be met with a robust international response. Putin responds only to power. Alexander Vershbow, Distinguished Fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Brent Scowcroft Center on International Security: Russia’s illegal blockade of the Kerch Strait and its violent seizure of Ukrainian ships are clear violations of international law and bilateral Ukrainian-Russian agreements. These actions can only be seen as premeditated acts of aggression aimed at destabilizing Ukraine in the run-up to Ukraine’s 2019 elections. Russia has been intensifying the pressure on Ukraine over the past three to four months in small steps, similar to what we saw in Russia’s creeping aggression against Georgia in the spring and summer of 2008. Moscow seems determined to show that Ukraine is a failed state that cannot defend its own borders in the hope of bringing more malleable leaders to power in Kyiv and reversing Ukraine’s rapprochement with the EU and NATO. Ukraine needs to show restraint in the zone of conflict and resist overreacting to further Russian provocations. At the same time, Kyiv should press its American and EU partners not just to condemn Russia’s aggression, but to impose real costs on Russia if it doesn’t reverse course and restore full and unhindered access to the Azov Sea for Ukrainian commercial ships and naval vessels. The United States and European Union need to impose much stronger economic sanctions on Russia, beginning with the suspension or cancellation of the Nordstream 2 pipeline, which would inflict serious damage on the Ukrainian economy while increasing European dependence on Russian gas. The United States and its allies should also expand NATO’s naval presence in the Black Sea and consider increased support to the Ukrainian Navy. If the latest attacks and illegal seizure of Ukrainian ships bring little more than a slap on the wrist, Putin will see this as a green light for further escalation, to include a full blockade or even the illegal annexation of the Azov Sea. President Trump has promised to be tougher than his predecessor, who allegedly “let Russia take Crimea.” Will Trump now let Russia take the Azov Sea as well?
This year could prove decisive for Ukraine. If war doesn’t come, reforms continue to be consolidated and enacted, and if a reasonable president and parliament emerge, all will be well and Ukraine’s march west will continue. But if Putin starts a “quick little war,” all bets are off. Ukrainians would fight fiercely, and the outcome would be uncertain, but the best-case scenario would be a return to a stalemate after thousands have died after a possible Russian occupation and guerrilla warfare by Ukrainian partisans. The worst case? Russia collapses owing to backlash at home, Putin is overthrown, and a mass conflict breaks out in Russia. Thanks to Putin, Ukraine has become a vital geostrategic interest to Europe and North America. Preventing a full-scale Russian invasion has to be the first priority, not only to prevent deaths and because the numbers of refugees streaming into Europe would be enormous, but also because such a misadventure could likely result in Russia’s collapse. Helping Ukraine resist — by providing it with arms and imposing the severest of sanctions on Russia — if and when a war hits, is the second priority. A third world war cannot be left to Putin and his minions. The only way to make war impossible is for Ukraine and the West to do everything possible to ensure it is impossible.
The bungled process that played out of the summer of 2013 may have been a turning point in the Syrian war. As an observer later noted, “By early 2014, opposition hopes in a Western-backed military victory were deflated Syrian government loyalists seemed to feel a new sense of security, and the US intelligence community had begun to worry more about jihadi segments of the opposition than about Assad himself.”136 In France, there is a strong sense that an element of causality is at play: the rise of jihadi forces was partly caused by the sense of abandonment by the West. Hollande, in particular, is “convinced” that the history of Syria would have been different had the West carried out a substantial strike.137 Having witnessed Obama’s abandonment of the Hosni Mubarak regime in Egypt, Gulf allies saw the US administration as feckless and unreliable (something the French soon benefitted from politically and commercially). The US’s own National Intelligence Council noted in a report that “unenforced red lines” had damaged US influence in the Middle East.138 Secretary Kerry – who had lobbied in 2013 for action partly in the name of US “credibility” – admitted as much. There are broader, but unanswered questions about whether this affected Western deterrence at large. Was Vladimir Putin encouraged to act in Ukraine? Did Iran and North Korea feel that they could continue resist the West because Obama failed to act, thus giving the impression that US threats were hollow? Many believe so.140 Three former Obama defense secretaries have stated that US credibility was damaged.141 This also includes the French. Hollande reportedly thought that “if Obama did not strike, how can one believe that he will help Israel in case it was attacked by an Iran that crossed a red line?”142 French leaders expressed the view that the 2013 US abstention encouraged aggression elsewhere. “President Obama had said that it was a red line and that ‘if he did that, I would react’. We were ready to react, then there was no reaction. From then on, Mr. Putin decided that he could intervene in several territories, like Crimea and Ukraine”, said Fabius.143 “This signal has been interpreted as weakness by the international community. That is what provoked the Ukraine crisis, the illegal annexation of Crimea and what is happening right now in Syria”, said Hollande.144 “I am connecting what did not happen in Syria with what happened in Ukraine”, he would later say.145 Interestingly, President Macron has adopted the same line (see below). Our purpose here is not settle the long-running dispute between policymakers who believe as an article of faith that credibility matters and the many scholars who cannot find, in their datasets and models, evidence to demonstrate a role for credibility matters.146 We share the concerns of others that the role of reputation is often poorly specified in many models.147 What we note is that many policymakers, feel strongly that credibility matters and assert that it did alter their judgment about the reliability of the American President. This was a test that US officials often set from themselves. The decision was, after all, taken by a president whose own Vice-president and Deputy National Security Adviser had both flatly stated that great powers “don’t bluff”.148 Russian officials, for their part, obviously deny that there any connection between events in Syria and subsequent actions by Moscow in Ukraine.14
Ukraine seeks to partner more closely with the U.S., NATO, and the European Union (EU), and it has made progress in developing a capable, sustainable, and professional force. USEUCOM supports Ukraine’s efforts through the Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine (JMTG-U), combined exercises including the annual naval Exercise SEA BREEZE, and other activities. The United States delivered the Javelin anti-armor capability to Ukraine in April 2018 to deter Russian aggression against Ukraine. Continued senior-level engagement and support for Ukrainian self-defense capabilities and institutional reform will help enhance regional security and demonstrate our continued commitment to Ukraine’s security and territorial integrity, and a rules-based international order in Europe.
The Case for Increased U.S. Military Assistance Now The situation in eastern Ukraine is urgent and deteriorating. In recent weeks, the flow of heavy weapons has grown markedly, and Moscow is no longer taking steps to hide this support from overhead imagery. Fighting along the line of contact increased significantly during the week of January 19. Aleksandr Zakharchenko, leader of the self-proclaimed “Donetsk People’s Republic,” indicated on January 23 that the separatists would seek to take all of the Donetsk oblast. Large numbers of Russian forces remain deployed along the border, ready to enter Ukraine on very short notice. Russian and separatist forces clearly have the capacity for further offensive military action—whether to gain control of the entire Donbas region or, worse, to establish a land bridge between Russia and the Crimea through effective control of southeastern Ukraine. Any such offensive move would set back the prospect for a peaceful settlement and further destabilize Ukraine. The costs to the West of maintaining an independent Ukraine would then only grow, and Moscow might be emboldened to take further actions. While these actions may not seem likely, they certainly are not unthinkable. Few analysts at the end of 2013 would have considered a Russian military seizure of Crimea or invasion of the Donbas “thinkable.” The post-World War II effort to create a safer Europe is under serious threat. The 1975 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe Final Act, in which Russia agreed to respect the “inviolability of borders” in Europe, has been blatantly violated. The United States, moreover, is a signatory to the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances for Ukraine. In that document, the United States, Britain and Russia committed to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, and not to use or threaten to use force against Ukraine. Russia has grossly violated those commitments, which were key to Kyiv’s decision to eliminate its nuclear weapons. The United States and Britain should, in response, do more to robustly support Ukraine and penalize Russia. This is not just a question of honoring U.S. commitments under international agreements. It is important for preserving the credibility of security assurances for the future, when they might play a role in resolving other nuclear proliferation cases, such as Iran and North Korea. Above and beyond Ukraine—and more important in strategic terms for the United States and NATO—is the need to respond to the challenge to European and Eurasian security posed by the Kremlin’s aggressive policies. Russia has broken the cardinal rule of postwar European security, i.e., states must not use military force to change international borders. Putin and the Kremlin have proclaimed a unique and legally dubious right to “protect” ethnic Russians and Russian speakers, wherever they are located and whatever their citizenship. This was the justification that Putin belatedly offered for Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea, despite the fact that there was no credible threat to ethnic Russians in Crimea. If not constrained, such Russian policies represent a clear danger to European security, the North Atlantic community, as well as to Russia’s neighbors in Eurasia. Given the many other world challenges confronting the United States, especially problems in the broader Middle East and the strategic challenge posed by the rise of China, Washington and other capitals have not devoted sufficient attention to the threat posed by Russia and its implications for Western security. This must change. If the United States and NATO do not adequately support Ukraine, Moscow may well conclude that the kinds of tactics it has employed over the past year can be applied elsewhere. Of particular concern would be Russian actions to destabilize Estonia or Latvia, each of which has a significant ethnic Russian minority and both of which are NATO members to whom the United States and allies have an Article 5 commitment. The Kremlin has already demonstrated aggressive intent in the Baltics by kidnapping an Estonian security official the day the NATO Wales summit ended. To be sure, there are issues on which the interests of the United States and the West, on the one hand, and Russia, on the other, coincide. These include preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear arms, avoiding a return of the Taliban or chaos in Afghanistan, the broader counterterrorism struggle, and controlling nuclear weapons and materials. But these interests should not outweigh the West’s interest in blocking Russian aggression that poses a threat not just to Ukraine, but also to the security of broader Europe and the transatlantic community. The world has faced this kind of challenge before. History makes clear that the only way to stop such aggression from precipitating a regional or even worldwide conflagration is to deter and defend against it as early as possible and not to be fooled by protestations of innocent motives or lack of further ambitions. Providing Military Support to Deter Further Aggression The Ukrainian military appears capable of limited military operations, such as the January 19 counterattack on the Donetsk airport (the airport reportedly has since been lost). Given the experience of August, however, Kyiv is most unlikely to launch a major military effort to try to regain control of Donetsk and Luhansk; President Poroshenko has said there can be no military solution and has sought a negotiated settlement. There remains, however, the question of Kyiv’s ability to defend itself against further Russian attacks. Even with enormous support from the West, the Ukrainian army will not be able to defeat a determined attack by the Russian military. This point is well understood in Kyiv. The more appropriate goal of Western military assistance should be to give the Ukrainian military additional defense capabilities that would allow it to inflict significant costs on the Russian military, should the Russians launch new offensive operations, sufficient enough that Moscow will be deterred from further aggression. The United States and NATO should seek to create a situation in which the Kremlin considers the option of further military action in or against Ukraine too costly to pursue. The combination of closing off that option plus the cumulative impact of Western economic sanctions could produce conditions in which Moscow decides to negotiate a genuine settlement that allows Ukraine to reestablish full sovereignty over Donetsk and Luhansk. (The West cannot lose sight of the status of Crimea, though Kyiv has said that that is an issue for the longer term; it correctly attaches priority to the Donbas situation.) Putin’s aggression in Ukraine and self-proclaimed right to protect ethnic Russians and Russian speakers wherever they are pose the gravest security threat to the transatlantic community and Eurasia since the end of the Cold War. The United States and NATO must recognize this danger and adjust policies and allocate resources accordingly. A firm Western response can bolster Kyiv’s ability to deter further Russian attacks. Moreover, if confronted by a strong Western response in support of Ukraine, the Kremlin will be far less tempted to challenge the security or territorial integrity of other states, including NATO members Estonia and Latvia.
Armchair strategists have come out of the woodwork to explain why it would be a mistake for the United States to arm Ukraine. They argue that Russia is stronger than Ukraine and can outmatch any escalation, Moscow has a greater interest in Ukraine than Washington, and Ukraine’s government is corrupt and undeserving of such support. These arguments are based on hoary myths, outdated analyses, and an incomplete understanding of Kremlin policy and American interests. In “Don’t Arm Ukraine,” Michael Brendan Dougherty claims that “Ukraine is a deeply divided country,” echoing the infamous CIA National Intelligence Estimate from the 1990s that said Ukraine might split in two. But that prediction proved false and, while differences between east and west Ukraine have not disappeared, they have lessened considerably since 2014. Dougherty wrongly asserts that “Russian-speaking Ukrainians see the United States as complicit in overturning a democratic result in 2015.” First, he probably meant 2014, when President Viktor Yanukovych fled following massive protests. Second, the vast majority of Ukrainians speak Russian and the vast majority of Ukrainians welcomed Yanukovych’s departure after he either ordered or permitted the use of snipers against demonstrators. It is true that the Kremlin is peddling the falsehood that the United States was responsible for Yanukovych’s ouster, but it has gained little traction even in the parts of the country where sympathy toward Moscow was once substantial. That sympathy is much reduced because of the Kremlin’s ongoing war in Ukraine. Dougherty observes that “successive governments in Kyiv have turned out to be ineffective and/or hopelessly corrupt.” While there is much truth in this statement, it is incomplete and ultimately misleading. Under Poroshenko, reform in Ukraine has been impressive. The government has cleaned up the banking sector, introduced a transparent system for government procurement, and moved toward a single, market price for natural gas. This last measure cleaned up the country’s most corrupt sector, removed its dependence on Russia for natural gas, and reduced its budget deficit by 80 percent. While corruption remains a major problem, the IMF and EBRD give Ukraine good marks overall for reform, especially since these efforts are taking place in the midst of a war. Former NSC Senior Director Charles Kupchan joins Dougherty in claiming that the United States has no major interests in Ukraine. But as Secretary of Defense James Mattis has pointed out, Russia is “resurgent and more aggressive” and has placed the “international order under assault.” Moscow is the world’s other nuclear superpower with the second or third most powerful conventional military. Russian President Vladimir Putin claims the right to intervene on behalf of ethnic Russians and Russian speakers wherever they live and wants a sphere of influence within the former Soviet Union, if not beyond. To achieve these aims, he went to war with Georgia in 2008 and has been at war with Ukraine since 2014. His ambitions go far beyond Ukraine. The United States has a vital interest in keeping the peace in Europe, and a vital interest in the strength and viability of NATO and the European Union. The Kremlin seeks to weaken both institutions and the ties binding the United States to Europe. The most cost efficient way to counter the Kremlin’s revisionist policies is to increase the cost of its aggression in Ukraine. Thanks to Congress, we are raising the economic costs on Moscow through sanctions. But that is not sufficient. Another error in Dougherty’s article is the suggestion that the Russian public, like the Putin government, is “willing to lose troops in battle.” Kupchan shares this view, claiming that the master public manipulator Putin “would hardly fold his hand if Russian casualties were to increase.” In fact, numerous polls by the Levada Center, the premier Russian polling institution, show that Russians do not want their soldiers fighting in Ukraine. For that reason, Putin hides his casualties from the public. Providing defensive arms to Ukraine—specifically Javelin missiles that destroy tanks—would make it harder for the Kremlin to conduct additional offensives because it would mean more Russian casualties. Leonid Bershidsky argues that it is futile to send anti-tank weapons to Ukraine because Moscow has 20,000 tanks and can always provide more. In addition, he asserts, there have been few changes in territory around the contact line over the past two years and, therefore, anti-tank weapons would be used in a Ukrainian effort to take back the territories currently occupied by Moscow. This is simply wrong. Ukrainians have fought the Kremlin to a standstill, but there are casualties every day, and since the Minsk II ceasefire, Moscow has taken hundreds of additional square kilometers of Ukrainian territory. Providing anti-tank missiles will help deter Moscow from taking more. Kupchan also claims that sending arms would “cause a rift between the United States and its main European allies.” While Germany and France oppose the move, Chancellor Angela Merkel has said and German officials have told me privately that if the United States provided arms, they would still cooperate with Washington on seeking peace in Ukraine. The United States made a commitment to guarantee Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity when it gave up its nuclear weapons in 1994. Providing defensive weapons to Ukraine will honor that commitment and raise the cost of the war for Moscow. Over time, that may help persuade the Kremlin to withdraw from the Donbas. Even if it does not, it will force Moscow to waste additional resources in Ukraine and make them think twice about challenging us in the Baltics, where our NATO commitments would compel us to respond more forcefully. Providing defensive weapons to Ukraine actually decreases the odds of a dangerous US-Russian confrontation.
Russia illegally annexed Crimea from Ukraine in early 2014 and has since supported separatists in eastern Ukraine. While “Western support for Ukraine has been substantial and essential,” Herbst testified to the US Senate Foreign Affairs Committee’s Subcommittee on Europe and Regional Security Cooperation, “it has not been as agile and effective as it could be.” Ukraine’s military struggle against Russia deserves specific Western assistance, Herbst argued. “Kyiv has fought the world’s second-most powerful military to a standstill,” he explained, adding that “there are 2,500 Russian military officers leading the Kremlin war in Donbas and they have at their disposal over 450 tanks and 700 pieces of artillery.” While attention has faded from this frontline, Herbst reminded lawmakers that “there has not been a day of peace since Moscow’s aggression began in the spring of 2014.” “Over 13,000 Ukrainians have died in this war,” he continued. “Moscow hopes that its constant pressure on Ukraine will force the government to stop building a democratic and open society oriented to the West. So far, the Kremlin is not succeeding.” On June 18, the Pentagon announced it was giving $250 million worth of military aid and equipment—some of it lethal—to Ukraine’s armed forces. This new aid, which has been authorized by Congress, brings US support to Ukraine to $1.5 billion since 2014. “The new funds will provide equipment to support ongoing training programs and operational needs, including capabilities to enhance: maritime situational awareness and operations as part of ongoing US efforts to increase support for Ukraine’s Navy and Naval Infantry; the defensive capacity and survivability of Ukraine’s Land and Special Operations Forces through the provision of sniper rifles, rocket-propelled grenade launchers, and counter-artillery radars; command and control; electronic warfare detection and secure communications; military mobility; night vision; and, military medical treatment,” the Pentagon said in a statement. “This security cooperation is made possible by Ukraine’s continued progress on the adoption of key defense institutional reforms to align Ukraine’s national security architecture with Euro-Atlantic principles,” it added. The Pentagon affirmed US commitment to help Ukraine “implement provisions of Ukraine’s 2018 Law on National Security to strengthen democratic civilian control of the military, promote command and control reforms, enhance transparency and accountability in acquisition and budgeting, and advance defense industry reforms.” “These reforms will bolster Ukraine’s ability to defend its territorial integrity in support of a secure, prosperous, democratic, and free Ukraine,” it said. Herbst explained that Russia has a significant weakness in its war in Ukraine because “the Russian people have clearly stated that they do not want Russian forces fighting in Ukraine… [This] means that [Russian President Vladimir] Putin must hide his casualties and keep them to a minimum.” It is vital therefore, Herbst argued, that the West help Ukrainian forces exact greater costs on the Russian armed forces for pushing into Ukrainian territory. “Western military support, especially advanced weapons like the Javelins, help nullify Moscow’s tank advantage,” Herbst explained. He praised the Trump administration’s decision to sell the Javelin anti-tank missile systems to Ukraine and told lawmakers that “the United States should also provide shore radar, Mark V speed boats, and anti-ship Harpoon missiles to help Ukraine deter further Kremlin provocations at sea.”
Russia’s resurgence in the Black Sea has not come without cost, however. One effect of Moscow’s annexation of Crimea was a significant extension of its 200-mile exclusive economic zone in the Black Sea, and Russia now shares a de facto maritime border with NATO in the region. This left Moscow’s maritime neighbors in NATO uneasy. Despite lingering domestic challenges amid overt and covert Russian diplomatic and political measures, these countries are slowly beginning to respond in an attempt to even the balance. Turkey, despite its rapprochement with Russia in the wake of the 2015 shootdown of a Russian Su-24 on its border with Syria, seeks to boost its naval presence in the Black Sea. While Moscow has seen some success in its efforts to create daylight between Ankara and NATO, Turkey has apparently not, at least officially, abandoned the goal of containing Russia in the region. Ankara maintains the largest navy among the Black Sea riparian states, and has declared its intention to pursue a sea control strategy in the case of a conflict. It is also in the process of modernizing its navy with newer frigates, fast patrol boats, and amphibious assault ships. What Turkey lacks, however, is a potent shore-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capability, as well as a long-range strike capability similar to that in Crimea. Its navy will be increasingly torn between littoral security operations and competing with its rival on the north shore of Black Sea. While Turkish rapprochement with Russia has raised concerns in NATO, Romania has begun improving its naval capabilities and tightening its alliance relationships. Bucharest’s navy is comparatively small and, with most of its platforms built in the 1970s and 1980s, is old. Its capabilities lag well behind Russia’s. Recognizing this, the Romanian government has announced plans to buy four new surface combatants and three submarines for operations in the Black Sea, and Defense Minister Mihai Fifor declared 2018 “dedicated to the Romanian Navy.” Bucharest also hopes to offset this weakness by deepening its relationship with NATO. Its navy’s participation in the Sea Breeze multinational exercise has markedly increased, and Bucharest has also agreed to host NATO’s newest regional headquarters, Multinational Division Southeast. Romania is also one of the few NATO nations, it should also be noted, to have committed to spending 2 percent of its GDP on defense, though it did not hit that mark in 2017. Bulgaria, long caught between the Scylla and Charybdis of NATO and Moscow, has also made moves toward a modest reinvestment in its navy. In April 2016, the government approved a $1.4 billion purchase program for new aircraft and naval vessels, including at least two modern, multi-functional corvettes and 16 fixed-wing tactical aircraft. Last year, Sofia also completed a modernization program for its fleet of (Russian-made) Mig-29 fighters. While the acquisition of less than a handful of new corvettes may not appear at first glance to be a major investment, their upgraded capabilities will allow the Bulgarian navy to forge closer ties with NATO navies through participation in a variety of NATO maritime exercises. Nevertheless, Bulgaria’s commitment to NATO is still less than Washington or Brussels would like it to be, as it has fallen far short of the 2 percent of GDP threshold for member nation defense spending. The growth of Russian military force in the Black Sea has shifted regional naval dominance in Moscow’s favor. However, Russia’s seizure and re-militarization of Crimea has resulted in a reemerging security dilemma in Moscow vis-à-vis NATO nations in the Black Sea. Turkey, Romania, and Bulgaria, despite widespread overt and covert Russian influence campaigns, recognize that they require a modernized force to counter Moscow and are fitfully attempting to pull the balance closer to their favor. Nevertheless, in the short term, given the emplacement of Russia’s impressive “counter-naval” force in Crimea, regional navies will remain heavily dependent on their NATO allies, particularly the United States, for military assistance. Ukraine, meanwhile, is likely to have its subjugation continue.
The Trump administration last week announced updated sanctions on Russian individuals and companies, a reminder that the conflict in eastern Ukraine remains unresolved. In late December, the administration decided to begin supplying antitank missiles to Ukraine, a reversal of an Obama-era decision not to provide lethal weapons to this conflict. Since 2015, the conflict in eastern Ukraine has continued to simmer, with no apparent political solution on the horizon. The seizure of territory has largely ended, leaving both sides vexed at their failure to achieve their objectives. The U.S. decision in late 2017 to provide the Ukrainian government advanced Javelin antitank missiles — a move applauded by a number of former policymakers and think tanks — opens up a few big questions: 1) What’s the backstory on the lethal weaponry decision? Tanks initially weren’t in play in 2014 when Russia annexed the strategically important Crimean Peninsula after popular protests drove Ukraine’s pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych from power. Speed was the decisive factor, and Russia was able to take over Crimea before Ukraine could muster any defense. Shortly thereafter, Russia used covert action — an attractive option with lower political and economic costs, along with a limited risk of escalation to outright war — to instigate and foster a rebellion in the eastern parts of Ukraine. Moscow used proxy actors and limited injections of its own troops. When Russia’s covert foray escalated into a conventional conflict, defined by tanks and artillery support, many in the United States urged that Ukraine be supplied with Javelin missiles, which are designed to defeat tanks. Bumping up Ukraine’s defensive capabilities to counter the supply of Russian tanks would even the playing field, the argument held. [Things are heating up in eastern Ukraine. Here are three reasons why.] The Obama administration decided not to supply Javelins to Ukraine, due to concerns over escalation and entangling the United States in a deeper conflict with Russia. Even without the Javelins, Ukraine was able to seize back much of the territory it had lost, but direct Russian intervention prevented a total Ukrainian victory. In the end, the Minsk II agreements in the fall of 2014 laid out a cease-fire plan. But the guns never fell fully silent, and there has been little progress toward a permanent peace settlement. 2) How do the Javelins change the picture? Since 2015, the United States has provided Ukraine with $750 million in nonlethal aid, including Humvees, night-vision equipment and short-range radar systems. Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and administration officials had urged President Trump to include lethal weaponry in the U.S. military assistance program. Yet the decision is not simply a military one — there are also significant risks. Some analysts argue that the U.S. Javelins support Ukraine’s ability to defend itself. The risk of escalating the conflict remains low because Russia can distinguish Javelins as a defensive weapon, not an offensive one. While some political scientists agree that being able to differentiate between offensive and defensive weapons lowers the risk of war, others question the ability to understand an adversary’s intentions by the type of weaponry they acquire. In the event of further Russian offensives, Javelins ensure Russian costs increase (although those costs would largely be in the form of proxy casualties, a limited disincentive for Russia). U.S. Javelins — an advanced system, and expensive, at $246,000 a pop — are quite effective but aren’t the only option to bolster Ukraine’s antitank capabilities. Ukraine’s own defense industry produces capable antitank missiles for a portion of that price, for instance.
WASHINGTON - The United States needs more firepower and focus to push back against ever-increasing Russian aggression across Europe and beyond, according to the top U.S. commander in Europe. In testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee Tuesday, European Command’s Gen. Curtis Scaparrotti called Russia the primary threat to stability in Europe and recommended the U.S. boost the number of troops it deploys to the continent on both a permanent and rotational basis. Scaparrotti said he was particularly concerned about insufficient intelligence and surveillance capabilities, as well as a shrinking advantage on the high seas. “I’ve asked for two more [naval] destroyers,” Scaparrotti told lawmakers, saying the need for additional ships was critical “if we want to remain dominant in the maritime domain." "We do need greater capacity, particularly given the modernization and the growth of the Russian fleets in Europe,” he said, noting growing concern about the presence of Russian submarines in European and international waters. Countering Russian Influence Scaparrotti, who also serves as the supreme allied commander for NATO, is not the first high ranking U.S. military official to raise concerns about what many in the U.S. see as Russia’s increasingly aggressive posture. Last month, a report by the U.S. military’s Defense Intelligence Agency warned of the threat posed by Russia’s action is space, while the commander of U.S. forces in Africa cautioned Moscow was playing on perceived U.S. weakness to gain influence there. US General Warns of Russian, Chinese Inroads in Africa In his prepared testimony Tuesday, Scaparrotti said Europe, however, was still the lynchpin to Moscow’s overall approach. "Moscow seeks to assert its influence over nations along its periphery, undermine NATO solidarity, and fracture the rules-based international order,” he wrote, adding from there, Russia is looking to “increase its influence and expand its presence in Afghanistan, Syria, and Asia.” Scaparrotti told lawmakers that the U.S. military has been working closely with European allies, including Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and the Baltic nations to develop the right capabilities to counter Russian aggression. US support for Ukraine He also said strong consideration is being given to find more ways to support Ukraine. Since 2014, when Russia invaded Ukraine and annexed Crimea, the U.S. has given Kyiv more than $1 billion worth of military assistance, though the vast majority of it has been non-lethal. To date, the lone exception has been shipments of javelin missiles which started last April (2018), following authorizations by U.S. President Donald Trump and Congress. Scaparrotti said the additional lethal aid could include sniper systems, ammunition and even naval warfare systems, citing Russia’s seizure of Ukrainian naval vessels last November, as part of an effort to block off Ukrainian access to the Kerch Strait. Disinformation, cyberattacks and arms race But like top U.S. intelligence officials, the commander of U.S. forces in Europe cautioned that while Russia is strengthening its military might, the biggest threat comes from the Kremlin’s devotion to information warfare. And he raised concerns Washington’s response in that arena is lacking. “We need to probably get greater focus and energy into a strategy, a multifaceted strategy to counter Russia,” Scaparrotti said, "specifically within information operations, challenging their disinformation in cyber.” U.S. lawmakers Tuesday also raised concerns about a possible nuclear arms race with Russia, with both President trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin announcing last month they are withdrawing from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. Russia Joins US, Will Suspend INF Nuclear Treaty The U.S. and its European allies accuse Moscow of violating the terms of the treaty, which prohibited ballistic and ground-launched cruise missiles with a range of 500 to 5,500 kilometers, since at least 2014. "We simply cannot tolerate this kind of abuse of arms control and expect for arms control to continue to be viable," a senior U.S. administration official said at the time. "Let's be clear: If there's an arms race, it is Russia that is starting it." Pressed on how the U.S. would proceed in a post-treaty environment, Scaparrotti said planning was underway. “I don't know that we have a plan today," he said. “We're still in a 6-month period here where we are looking at what our options are."
Last week, Michael Brendan Dougherty wrote a piece here calling for the U.S. to refrain from sending further arms to Ukraine. Unfortunately, the piece betrayed a lack of familiarity with the post-Soviet space and a broader ignorance of regional dynamics and came to a conclusion anathema to American interests, both current and future. Dougherty’s conclusion — that President Trump, despite support from Congress and those in the White House, should hold off on delivering anti-tank missiles to Ukraine — rests on a handful of points. First, to Dougherty, the delivery of such missile systems would “not meaningfully deter Moscow’s aggression” because the “Russian public [has] proven willing to lose troops in battle over the last two decades in vicious wars in Chechnya.” To those unfamiliar with the subject, there’s a whiff of truth to this argument, insofar as no amount of proposed American weaponry will allow Ukraine to defeat Russia outright. But the notion that defeating Russia outright would be the goal of any effort to arm Ukraine is simply false. No serious analyst has argued that American anti-tank arms would allow Kiev to “beat” Moscow. Indeed, the Kremlin’s regional “escalation dominance” remains one of the facts on which both sides agree. Contra Dougherty, the purpose of sending weapons to Kiev would be to heighten the costs of continued conflict for the Kremlin, which is currently slogging through yet another year of negligible growth. Because while Dougherty may view Russia, especially its government, as willing to sacrifice sufficient troops to defend the beleaguered separatists in eastern Ukraine, all available evidence suggests the opposite. There’s a reason Russian authorities have effectively shunned public acknowledgment of the Russian forces fighting in Ukraine. Authorities have already gone so far as to arrest elderly women attempting to understand Russia’s role in the region, and the country has seen lawmakers beaten simply for attempting to document Russian soldiers’ deaths. This is because while many within Russia continue to support the Russian-backed separatists in the region, their support is purely rhetorical, and will remain so as Russians’ belts keep tightening. At last check, barely 10 percent of Russians were willing to send their children to fight on the state’s behalf in eastern Ukraine — a reality the Kremlin, recently shaken by sudden, unprecedented protests, must recogDnize. Dougherty, unfortunately, fails to discern between Chechnya (a constituent republic within Russia proper) and eastern Ukraine (a slice of the fanciful “Novorossiya” whose star has only waned since 2014). He may believe that Russians stand ready to sacrifice for greater autonomy in eastern Ukraine, but such claims only highlight his thin understanding of post-Soviet dynamics. Perhaps most concerning of all, Dougherty appears to believe that backing Ukraine — a country he chauvinistically refers to as “not a particularly admirable state,” as if battling Russian-backed secessionists to a stalemate and effectively neutering Russia’s attempts at a Eurasian Union weren’t admirable accomplishments — with anti-tank weaponry is simply about “get[ting] Vladimir Putin’s goat,” whatever that may mean. It’s almost as if he views the maintenance of the post-Cold War order as a secondary concern. Just like the current sanctions regime, which signals a Western unity in the face of Russian revanchism, the delivery of anti-tank weaponry to Kiev would signal America’s commitment to the post-Cold War European order and its international norms, which Moscow continues to threaten. After all, governments in Belarus and Kazakhstan — both, like Ukraine, signees to the Budapest Memorandum, in which they agreed to sacrifice their nuclear arsenals in return for assurances of territorial integrity — continue to eye Russia warily, even as they worry about whether the U.S. will live up to commitments Moscow has chosen to abrogate. Should the U.S. falter, its standing in the post-Soviet space, and elsewhere, will be further diminished. Thankfully, Dougherty, like Trump, appears to be in the minority. Like President Obama — who listened impassively as numerous Cabinet members, from Joe Biden to John Kerry, argued in favor of delivering arms to Ukraine — Trump appears to be the only major figure in his own White House opposed to arming Kiev.
President Obama's inaction after drawing a "red line" during previous foreign crises encouraged Russian President Vladimir Putin to send troops into Crimea, Sen. Ron Johnson says. "The president will set red lines and when the red line is crossed, do nothing, and that certainly emboldens people like Putin, which gives him sort of the green light to do what he did," the Wisconsin Republican told "The Steve Malzberg Show" on Newsmax TV. Johnson believes a weak United States policy has allowed Putin to flagrantly flex his muscles. "We've got to recognize what gives Putin … impunity this way? It's because America's been showing weakness," he said. "We are weakened economically after five years of this administration, we are weaker in world opinion because we have been leading from behind. We've been withdrawn from the world. So we actually have to show some resolve for once." The U.S. must make Putin "feel the pain" of his lawless actions in Ukraine, Johnson says. "You need to start turning the heat on Vladimir Putin … and hope that eventually Russia will roll back and let Ukraine decide for Ukraine in terms of exactly what their governmental structure is going to be doing. "Obviously Vladimir Putin's been lying. He's entered into Crimea under false pretenses, and again the real danger is more expansive and the only way you check somebody like Vladimir Putin is he actually has to feel the pain. "Sanctions are actually a pretty good idea …. That's not a bad first step, but we actually have to do it." On Thursday, Secretary of State John Kerry promised to continue talks with Russia, which remains locked in a tense stand-off with the Ukrainian military in the Crimea region. Putin has claimed the new Ukraine government in Kiev came to power via an “unconstitutional coup,” and force may be needed to restore order as “a last resort.” Johnson says President Barack Obama is "talking the right talk," but actions speak louder than words. "We need to do everything we can, again, through action to dissuade them, to create any disincentive for them not to continue their march into more of eastern Ukraine." Johnson said the U.S. must think long term on Russia and the underlying reasons for its aggression. "What props Putin up is high energy prices which is why I've never felt Putin and Russia to be a reliable partner in the Mideast. Mideast chaos is in their benefit. It props oil prices up which is the only thing that keeps that economy going," he said. "So we need to look at this economically. We've got to show resolve over a very long period of time …. The administration claims they're going to do that. They're going to be steady, they're going to be determined…. Well, the proof will be in the pudding."
The State Department says the U.S. will provide Ukraine with “enhanced defensive capabilities” to protect itself against Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine. What this means, according to news reports, is that the U.S. is finally prepared to help Ukraine’s military punch back in a murky conflict cooked up by Putin. American weapons going to Ukraine will include Javelin anti-tank missiles and sniper rifles. You may be surprised to learn there still is a conflict in eastern Ukraine. Indeed there is, with reports of intensified shelling in recent days, though an ostensible cease-fire has been in place for more than two years. Violence there has killed more than 10,000 people since 2014 and driven 1.5 million people from their homes. Putin is the scheming villain responsible for splintering Ukraine as part of his ambition to reassert Russian power. In 2014, he waltzed into Crimea (there is no better verb to describe his actions). Putin seized and annexed that vital region of Ukraine in the wake of Ukrainian political upheaval. He followed up by orchestrating the uprising in eastern Ukraine, intentionally destabilizing a country that had dreams of joining the European Union and NATO. President Barack Obama imposed sanctions on Russia but did little else after Putin took the Crimean Peninsula in what was the first big European land grab since World War II. Obama decided that providing lethal weapons to Ukraine would accomplish little but antagonize Putin. Yet refusing to arm Ukraine had the opposite effect: It emboldened Putin. Obama’s hesitance is one reason why Russia-backed rebels control eastern Ukraine today. Trump, who generally sees himself as an active defender of U.S. interests, has his own problems figuring out Putin. The president at times sounds strangely enamored with the Russian strongman. Certainly Trump’s not the first American leader to underestimate Putin, but he’s the first to sound admiring of a foreign aggressor whose government meddled in an American election. U.S. officials have been signaling new support for providing Ukraine with arms. The point is not to encourage an escalation of fighting or draw Russia into direct confrontation with the United States but to make Russian interference in Ukraine more costly. “Defensive weapons are not provocative unless you are an aggressor and clearly Ukraine is not an aggressor since it is their own territory where the fighting is happening,” Defense Secretary James Mattis said in Kiev in August. Javelin missiles are tank killers. The separatists possess Russian armored vehicles. Are Russian soldiers fighting alongside the separatists? The Russian government insists it is not directly involved, but it’s interesting to hear the concerned tone of Moscow’s reaction to America providing arms. “The American weapons can lead to more victims in the neighboring country, and we couldn’t stay indifferent to that,” Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov said. Will that Russian reaction translate into a more lethal conflict? Yes. But war in Ukraine is a reality, and a West that flinches from the prolonged Russian incursion will only please Putin. The bottom line is that Putin’s meddling in the affairs of other states won’t stop unless he is challenged. Trump has done that. Ukraine’s ability to fight back against the separatists has been hampered by a lack of firepower. Now it will get some. Now Ukraine can punch back.
As an authoritarian and centralised state, Russia can make decisions quickly, while NATO is a community of nations and taking joint decisions may take more time. However, the Russian side must take into account that in the event of its invasion, the Baltic states will begin resistance without any harmonisation, and also other NATO members such as the United States, Britain, Poland, etc. can carry out its counter-measures against Russia straight away – in the first hours of the conflict, besides that, the strikes can be targeted not only against the invading Russian forces in the Baltic states, but also in Russia’s own territory. CEPA researchers also point out that “in the case of the United States, this could mean strikes deep inside Russia against infrastructure and energy facilities, as well as cyber attacks to shut down Russian communications, disrupt economic activity, and provoke societal dysfunction.”12 And even more to that – “the United States may even need to expressly reassert that its extended (nuclear) deterrent is the backbone of its ironclad commitment to Article 5. Any Russian use of nuclear weapons will be met with an overwhelming and devastating NATO nuclear response – thereby undermining Moscow’s confidence that it can ever prevent the injection of U.S. and NATO forces into a contested theatre.”13 Western countries are no longer the same as before Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, the pink glasses are off, especially in the defence institutions of the NATO member states. The Kremlin should no longer expect the indecisiveness in the NATO capitals. The activation of Article 5 of the NATO will be almost automatic rather than a result of long negotiations.